{\rtf1\fbidis\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\fnil Arial;}{\f2\fnil\fcharset1 Cambria Math;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f4\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}{\f5\fnil Cambria;}{\f6\fnil\fcharset0 Cambria;}{\f7\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Symbol;}{\f8\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Emoji;}{\f9\fnil\fcharset1 Segoe UI Emoji;}{\f10\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green176\blue80;\red255\green0\blue0;\red54\green95\blue145;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.22621}{\*\mmathPr\mmathFont2\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs24\par
\b Vegan/Vegetarian warning\b0 : Gelatin/jelly is a concern in any if getting gummie forms of stuff, but protein, melatonin, Vitamin A, ALCAR and taurine are often made from animals, though alternatives are available be sure to check. I have done my best to flag potential animal-derived products below. \par
\b Pregnancy/Breast-feeding warning\b0 : Many supplements lack sufficient research to be guaranteed to be safe and beneficial for pregnant or breast-feeding people. Always consult a doctor before starting a supplement. \par
\b N.B. \b0 Your best bet is always to get nutrients directly from food, encouraging your body's natural processing and metabolism can provide what you need. Obviously, this is not always feasible or sufficient, if supplementing check the bio-availability of the product and its best absorption methods. Some need others to absorb properly or work synergistically, others need to be taken with food/water, etc. Always consult each individual product's packaging for dosage information. \par
\i\fs22 Disclaimer \f1\endash  \f0 The information provided in this journal is for educational purposes only. It is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease, nor is it a substitute for professional medical advice. All supplement benefits listed reflect reported effects based on published studies, traditional use, or user experience, and may not apply to every individual. Always consult with a qualified healthcare provider before starting any new supplement, especially if you are pregnant, breastfeeding, taking medication, or managing a medical condition. BEDHEAD does not sell or endorse any specific supplement brands. The goal is to help you make informed choices\f1\emdash\f0 based on your own body, needs, and context.\i0\fs24\par
\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs36 VITAMINDEX \b0\fs24\lang9\par
\i\lang1033 - You'll be a sommelier of supplements by the end of this - \par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 A\b0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\fs24 Acetyl L-Carnitine (ALCAR) (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Enhances mitochondrial energy production (especially in brain and muscles). May improve cognitive function and memory. Supports nerve regeneration and protects against neurodegeneration. Potential mood-lifting effects (may help in depression)\par
Sources: Minimal in food\f1\emdash\f0 precursor L-Carnitine found in red meat and dairy. Capsules, powders\par
Considerations: May cause agitation or insomnia in sensitive individuals. May interact with thyroid medications. Should be taken earlier in the day due to possible stimulating effect\par
Conditions Benefited: Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS/ME). Fibromyalgia. Peripheral neuropathy. Cognitive decline and Alzheimer\f1\rquote\f0 s. Depression. Long Covid\par
\b\par
Activated Charcoal (Detox)\b0\par
Benefits: Binds toxins and chemicals in the gut (detox aid). Used for acute poisoning/overdose treatment. May reduce gas and bloating\par
Sources: Capsules, powders\par
Considerations: Not for long-term use: may bind to nutrients and medications. Take away from food and medications (at least 2 hours apart). Can cause constipation\par
Conditions Benefited: Acute poisoning. Digestive discomfort (gas, bloating). Possible help in die-off reactions (Herxheimer) during antimicrobial protocols\par
\par
\b Alpha-Lipoic Acid (ALA) (Antioxidant)\b0\par
Benefits: Potent antioxidant, both water- and fat-soluble. Enhances mitochondrial energy metabolism. Supports glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. May regenerate other antioxidants (e.g., Vitamin C, E, Glutathione)\par
Sources: Spinach, broccoli, organ meats (but in low amounts). Supplement capsules, R-ALA is a more bioavailable form\par
Considerations: Can lower blood sugar\f1\emdash\f0 monitor if diabetic. Best taken on an empty stomach. May cause a sulfur-like odor or GI upset\par
Conditions Benefited: Diabetic neuropathy. Multiple sclerosis (adjunctively). Cognitive issues. Liver support. Chronic fatigue\par
\par
\b Anti-biotics\par
\b0 Benefits: Kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria, treat bacterial infections. \par
Sources: Natural sources: derived from microorganisms such as fungi, molds, and soil bacteria, e.g., penicillin from penicillium mold, streptomycin from streptomyces bacteria. Semisynthetic: chemically modified natural antibiotics for better absorption or spectrum, e.g., amoxicillin, cefalexin. Synthetic: fully lab-made with no natural origin, e.g., Ciprofloxacin, Linezolid\par
Considerations: Kill both good and bad bacteria. Do not work on viral infections (like the flu, common cold, or COVID-19 unless secondary bacterial infections are present). Overuse or misuse breeds resistant bacteria (e.g., MRSA). Resistance can lead to untreatable infections and hospitalizations.Take full prescribed course\f1\emdash\f0 even if symptoms resolve early. Always combine with probiotic support (e.g., Saccharomyces boulardii, Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG). Avoid use for viral infections or \f1\ldblquote\f0 just in case.\f1\rdblquote  \f0 Monitor symptoms of side effects like diarrhea, rashes, fatigue, or unusual pain. Can lead to: dysbiosis, candida overgrowth, clostridioides difficile, infection, leaky gut and weakened immunity. Mitochondrial damage (with some types). Fluoroquinolones (e.g., ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin) may impair mitochondrial function and cause tendinopathy, neuropathy, or fatigue. Can interact with anticoagulants, seizure meds, antacids, and others. Allergic reactions common for some types\par
Conditions Benefited: Life-saving for serious infections (sepsis, pneumonia, meningitis). Prevents complications from spreading infections (e.g., cellulitis progressing to abscess or sepsis). Used prophylactically before surgeries or in immune-suppressed patients (e.g., cancer, transplant). Common bacterial Infections. Strep throat (Group A Streptococcus). Bacterial pneumonia. UTIs. Sinusitis (if prolonged or purulent). Otitis media (middle ear infection). Cellulitis and skin infections. Lyme disease (Borrelia burgdorferi). Tuberculosis (TB). Meningitis. STIs\par
\par
\b\lang9 Apple Cider Vinegar \par
\b0 Benefits: Claimed to support digestion, blood sugar regulation, and weight balance.\par
Sources: Raw ACV with \f1\ldblquote\f0 mother\f1\rdblquote  \f0 (unfiltered sediment)\par
Considerations: Acidic\f1\emdash\f0 can damage tooth enamel or irritate stomach lining. Dilute before drinking.\par
Conditions Benefited: Used for blood sugar spikes and sluggish digestion.\lang1033\par
\par
\b Arnica (Essential oil, folk remedy)\b0\par
Benefits: Reduces pain, swelling, bruising, and inflammation when applied topically\par
Sources: Arnica montana flower; gels, creams, ointments\par
Considerations: Not for open wounds or internal use. Can irritate skin\par
Conditions Benefited: Bruising, sprains, muscle soreness, post-surgery swelling\par
\par
\b Ashwagandha  (adaptogen) \cf1\b0\par
\cf0 Benefits: Adaptogen: helps balance stress hormones (cortisol). May improve sleep, reduce anxiety. Supports thyroid and adrenal health. May enhance muscle strength and endurance\par
Sources: Not typically found in regular foods. Capsules, powders, teas, tinctures (KSM-66 and Sensoril are common standardized forms)\par
Considerations: May interact with thyroid medications. Can cause GI upset in some; start low. Avoid in hyperthyroidism unless monitored. \par
Conditions Benefited: Anxiety and stress. Insomnia. Adrenal fatigue. Hypothyroidism. PCOS. Depression\par
\par
\b Astaxanthin (Antioxidant) \par
\b0 Benefits: Powerful antioxidant (more potent than Vitamin C/E). Supports skin health (UV protection). Improves endurance and recovery in athletes. Anti-inflammatory and cardiovascular protective\par
Sources: Wild-caught salmon, krill, shrimp, red trout. Supplement: Capsules (often from microalgae Haematococcus pluvialis)\par
Considerations: Fat-soluble \f1\emdash  \f0 take with food containing fat. May tint skin slightly orange at high doses. Safe for long-term use in moderate doses\par
Conditions Benefited: Eye health (macular degeneration). Joint inflammation. Cardiovascular disease. Skin aging. Mitochondrial dysfunction\par
\par
\b Vitamin A\par
- Retinol (Preformed Vitamin A)\par
\b0 Benefits: Supports vision, immune health, skin, reproduction. Crucial for epithelial tissue maintenance\par
Sources: Liver, cod liver oil, dairy, eggs. As a supplement: Retinyl palmitate or acetate\par
Considerations: Fat-soluble \f1\emdash  \f0 can accumulate and cause toxicity. Avoid high doses during pregnancy. Retinol is more bioavailable than beta-carotene\par
Conditions Benefited: Night blindness. Skin disorders (acne, psoriasis). Immune dysfunction\par
\par
\b - Beta-Carotene (ProVitamin A)\par
\b0 Benefits: Antioxidant; converts to Vitamin A in the body as needed\par
Sources: Carrots, sweet potatoes, spinach, kale, mango. As a supplement: beta-carotene alone or in mixed carotenoids\par
Considerations: Poor conversion in some individuals (due to genetics or health issues). High doses may increase cancer risk in smokers. Less risk of toxicity compared to retinol\par
Conditions Benefited: General immune and antioxidant support. Eye health. Skin health\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 B\b0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\fs24 BCAAs (Branched-Chain Amino Acids: Leucine, Isoleucine, Valine)\par
\b0 Benefits: Supports muscle growth and repair. Reduces muscle breakdown during stress or illness. May reduce exercise fatigue. May support energy in mitochondrial dysfunction\par
Sources: Animal proteins (meat, dairy, eggs), whey protein. Powders or capsules\par
Considerations: May be less effective if not taken with full protein/amino acid profile. Use with caution in liver disease (may help, but monitor ammonia)\par
Conditions Benefited: Muscle wasting (cachexia, bed rest, chronic illness. Exercise recovery. Chronic fatigue. Liver cirrhosis (may reduce brain fog from hepatic encephalopathy)\par
\b\par
Berberine\par
\b0 Benefits: Supports blood sugar and insulin regulation. Aids metabolic function. \lang9 Supports heart health \lang1033 -\lang9  Lowers LDL cholesterol and triglycerides. Aids weight loss Is antimicrobial and supports gut health \lang1033 -\lang9  Fights harmful bacteria, parasites, and Candida. May support brain function \lang1033 -\lang9  Possible neuroprotective effects\par
\lang1033 Sources: \lang9 bioactive compound found in several plants, including goldenseal, barberry, and Oregon grape. Supplement or capsule\lang1033\par
Considerations: Should not be combined with other blood sugar-lowering drugs without monitoring. Comparable to metformin in glucose control. \lang9 Best taken with meals to improve gut absorption\par
Conditions Benefited: Type 2 Diabetes and Insulin Resistance\lang1033 .\lang9  High Cholesterol and Heart Disease\lang1033 . \lang9 Gut Dysbiosis and SIBO\lang1033 .\lang9  Weight Management\lang1033 .\lang9  PCOS\par
\lang1033\par
\b Beta-Alanine\b0\par
Benefits: Buffers lactic acid buildup in muscles; may enhance exercise capacity and reduce fatigue\par
Sources: Produced in the body; supplements (capsules or powder)\par
Considerations: Common side effect is tingling (paresthesia), especially at higher doses. Best taken with food or split into smaller doses\par
Conditions Benefited: Muscle fatigue, endurance exercise, strength training\par
\par
\b Betaine (TMG) (coenzyme/enzyme, detox) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports methylation and liver detox pathways. Helps regulate homocysteine levels\par
Sources: Beets, spinach, whole grains; trimethylglycine (TMG) supplements\par
Considerations: Often paired with B12, folate, and choline. May lower homocysteine but raise LDL in some\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatty liver, high homocysteine, mood disorders, methylation issues\par
\par
\b Bilberry\b0\par
Benefits: Rich in anthocyanins (antioxidants that support eye health and circulation). May help improve night vision and reduce eye strain. Anti-inflammatory effects beneficial for heart health. Reduces oxidative stress. Supports blood sugar regulation\par
Sources: Capsules, extracts, dried fruit, tea\par
Considerations: May lower blood sugar, so diabetics should monitor levels carefully. Can thin the blood, so those on anticoagulants should consult a doctor\par
Conditions Benefited: Eye conditions (night blindness, macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy). Poor circulation (chronic venous insufficiency). High blood sugar (diabetes). Inflammation-related disorders\par
\b\par
Blackstrap Molasses (food, mineral) \par
\b0 Benefits: Rich in iron, magnesium, calcium, and potassium; used to address deficiency or anemia\par
Sources: Syrup from sugarcane refining\par
Considerations: High in sugar; watch portion size\par
Conditions Benefited: Anemia, mineral deficiency, fatigue, brittle nails\par
\par
\b Boswellia Serrata Extract\b0\par
Benefits: Anti-inflammatory; inhibits 5-LOX enzyme to reduce leukotriene production; supports joint health and inflammatory conditions\par
Sources: Resin from the Boswellia tree; typically standardized to 65% boswellic acids in capsules or powder\par
Considerations: Works synergistically with curcumin. Choose standardized extracts. May cause mild GI upset in some\par
Conditions Benefited: Osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, IBD, general inflammation\par
\par
\b Bromelain \b0\par
Benefits: Anti-inflammatory. Powerful protein-digesting enzyme. Pain relief. Immune modulation. Digestive support. May aid wound healing. Thins mucus, reduces sinus inflammation. Anticoagulant\par
Sources: Pineapple. Powder, in enzyme blends\par
Considerations: Take with meals. Avoid with blood thinners. Do not take if allergic to pineapple, papaya, or latex. May increase some antibiotic absorption. High doses may cause nausea, diarrhea or cramping\par
Conditions Benefited: Arthritis. May help MCAS. Sinusitis. Fibromyalgia. Injury recovery\par
\par
\b B Vitamins (B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B7, B8, B9, B12)\b0\par
Benefits: Support metabolic processes and energy production. Helps with mood regulation and cognitive decline. Improves nerve regeneration and function\par
Sources: Whole grains, leafy greens, eggs, meat, fish, dairy, potatoes. Supplements, powders, capsules often multiple combined in one. \par
Considerations: Best taken with a meal for optimal absorption. Often available as Vitamin B Complex - with some mix of most of the main ones. \par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue. Anxiety and depression, Cognitive decline. Anemia. Peripheral neuropathy. Panic attacks, and OCD. PCOS. Liver Health. Neurodevelopmental health. Pregnancy\par
Choosing the correct B vitamin: \par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\i Vitamin B1 (Thiamine)\b0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\i0 Benefits: Supports nerve function, energy metabolism.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Alcohol reduces absorption. Works with other B vitamins.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Helps energy production and skin health.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Light-sensitive; store properly. Works with B6 and iron.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Vitamin B3 (Niacin)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Supports cardiovascular health, cholesterol regulation.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Converts from tryptophan in the body. High doses may affect blood sugar.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b Vitamin B5 (\i Pantothenic Acid)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Supports the production of coenzyme A, essential for energy metabolism and synthesis of fatty acids, cholesterol, and hormones. Plays a role in adrenal function and stress resilience. May aid in wound healing and skin health.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Water-soluble\f1\emdash excess is excreted. Deficiency is rare but may occur with malnutrition or in alcohol use disorder. \f0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Vitamin B6 (Pyridoxine)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Supports brain health, neurotransmitter function.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Works with B12 and folate. High doses may interfere with some medications.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b Vitamin B7 (\i Biotin)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Supports healthy skin, hair, and nails. Plays a key role in metabolizing fats, carbohydrates, and proteins. Aids glucose regulation and supports nerve function.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Deficiency can occur with raw egg white consumption (avidin binds biotin). High supplemental doses can interfere with lab results, especially thyroid and cardiac tests\f1\emdash pause before bloodwork.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i\f0 Vitamin B8 (Inositol)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Mood regulation and mental health - it affects serotonin receptors in the brain. improves insulin sensitivity and ovarian function. Cell membrane health. It helps in fat metabolism and supports healthy liver function.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Available as a supplement, often in the form of myo-inositol or D-chiro-inositol, which are the active forms. Water soluble. Generally well-tolerated, but very high doses could cause digestive issues like diarrhea or bloating. It might interact with certain psychiatric medications, so consult with a doctor if on medication for mental health.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Vitamin B9 (Folic Acid, Folate)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Crucial for DNA synthesis, cell growth and fetal development. Supports red blood cell formation and prevents neural tube defects.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Consideration: Works with B12 and excess can mask B12 deficiency.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Supports energy production, nerve health, and red blood cell formation. Improves mood and cognition.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Works with folate and iron. Requires intrinsic factor; better absorbed as methylcobalamin. May need higher doses for vegetarians or those with absorption issues.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 C\par
\b0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\fs24 Cacao (Raw, Unprocessed Chocolate) \b0\par
Benefits: Rich in antioxidants - Contains flavonoids that fight oxidative stress. Helps lower blood pressure and improve circulation. Increases serotonin, dopamine, and endorphins. Improves focus, memory, and neuroprotection. Anti-inflammatory effects - Supports overall wellness and reduces inflammation. Acts as a prebiotic, feeding beneficial gut bacteria. Supports relaxation, muscle function, and sleep\par
Sources: Raw cacao powder (Retains the most nutrients and antioxidants), Cacao nibs, Cacao butter, Dark chocolate (85%+ cocoa content), Cacao tea (shell infusion) - Mild antioxidant-rich tee\par
Considerations: Can be a stimulant - Theobromine may increase heart rate and cause jitteriness in sensitive individuals. May interfere with sleep - Best consumed earlier in the day. Can contribute to kidney stones in susceptible individuals. Cacao can be problematic for those with mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS). Can trigger migraines - Some people are sensitive to tyramine in cacao\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression and anxiety. Brain fog and cognitive decline. Chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) - Provides natural energy without caffeine. Heart disease and high blood pressure. Gut microbiome imbalances. Muscle cramps and tension\b\par
\par
Caffeine  (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Stimulates the central nervous system, increasing alertness. Temporarily boosts energy and reduces fatigue. May enhance metabolism and exercise performance. Analgesic Enhancement and vasoconstrictive properties. \par
Sources: Coffee, tea, capsules, energy drinks, powder\par
Considerations: Can worsen anxiety, insomnia, or heart palpitations. May cause stomach irritation or acid reflux. Can lead to dependency\f1\emdash\f0 taper off slowly if discontinuing. Excessive caffeine can lead to jitteriness, anxiety, insomnia, and an increased heart rate. It may also elevate blood pressure in sensitive individuals. Regular consumption can lead to dependence, and a sudden decrease in intake might trigger withdrawal symptoms such as headaches and irritability\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue (ME/CFS, fibromyalgia, long covid). Brain fog and cognitive dysfunction. Low blood pressure (postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome - POTS). Migraine prevention (in small amounts)\par
\par
\b Calcium  (Electrolyte) \par
\b0 Benefits: Supports bone health, muscle function\par
Sources: Dairy, leafy greens, almonds\par
Considerations: Requires Vitamin D for absorption. Can interfere with iron and zinc absorption. Balance is key to avoid excess intake\par
Conditions Benefited: Muscle cramps. Hydration. Heart health. Blood pressure regulation\par
\par
\b Castor Oil (essential oil, folk remedy) \b0\par
Benefits: Promotes lymphatic drainage and liver detox via topical packs. Relieves constipation\par
Sources: Cold-pressed castor oil for external use\par
Considerations: For external use only. Do not ingest. May stain fabrics\par
Conditions Benefited: Constipation (topical pack), menstrual cramps, lymphatic congestion\par
\par
\b CBD (Cannabidiol)\b0\par
Benefits: Anti-inflammatory and pain-relieving properties. May help with anxiety and sleep disorders. Supports nervous system function. It also has neuroprotective properties\par
Sources: Oral: Oils, tinctures, capsules, gummies. Topical: Creams, balms, salves\par
Considerations: CBD is absorbed through the digestive tract (oral) or skin (topical). It interacts with the endocannabinoid system to regulate inflammation and neurotransmitter activity. May interact with medications (especially blood thinners). Oral CBD may cause drowsiness or digestive issues like diarrhea in high doses. Topical CBD is safer but may cause mild irritation in sensitive individuals. Best absorbed orally through sublingual use (under the tongue) or in a fat-based product to improve bioavailability\par
Conditions Benefited: Chronic pain (fibromyalgia, arthritis). Anxiety and depression. Sleep disorders (insomnia). Neurological conditions (epilepsy, multiple sclerosis). Inflammation-related disorders (IBD, autoimmune diseases)\par
\par
\b\lang9 Celery Juice\b0\par
Benefits: Promoted for digestion, bloating, and inflammation.\par
Sources: Fresh-blended juice (not store-bought blends)\par
Considerations: Mostly hype. Diuretic in some; can affect meds. No solid clinical backing.\par
Conditions Benefited: Used in wellness circles for IBS, skin, and general \f1\ldblquote\f0 reset.\f1\rdblquote\f0\lang1033\par
\par
\b Chaga (Antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: Immune system support. Anti-inflammatory. Antioxidant powerhouse. Supports gut. Liver detoxification. Blood sugar regulation - May improve insulin sensitivity. Heart health - Helps lower LDL ("bad") cholesterol and supports circulation. Potential anti-cancer properties\par
Sources: Tea, tincture, powder, capsules\par
Considerations: May lower blood sugar - Use caution if taking diabetes medications. Can interfere with blood clotting - Not recommended for those on blood thinners. Autoimmune conditions - Chaga can stimulate the immune system, so people with conditions like lupus or rheumatoid arthritis should consult a doctor. Kidney issues - Contains oxalates, which may contribute to kidney stones in high amounts\par
Conditions Benefited: Chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Autoimmune conditions (use with caution). Diabetes and insulin resistance. Gut issues (IBS, leaky gut, IBD). Cancer support (adjunct therapy) - High in protective compounds. Cardiovascular disease\par
\par
\b Choline\par
\b0 Benefits: Supports liver function, brain development, and acetylcholine production (important for memory and muscle control)\par
Sources: Eggs, liver, soy, cruciferous vegetables, supplements (choline bitartrate, CDP-choline)\par
Considerations: High doses may cause fishy body odor, GI upset. Essential during pregnancy\par
Conditions Benefited: Cognitive decline, fatty liver, prenatal support, ADHD\par
\par
\b Chromium\b0\par
Benefits: Blood sugar regulation. Improves insulin sensitivity. Weight management. Improved lipid profile. Support for muscle growth. Chromium may help lower LDL ("bad") cholesterol and triglycerides while raising HDL ("good") cholesterol. This can contribute to better cardiovascular health. Critical in the metabolism of fat, protein and carbs\par
Sources: Available in two main forms: chromium picolinate, which is often used as a supplement, and chromium chloride, which is the form found in food. Whole grains, meats (particularly liver), broccoli, grapes, potatoes, nuts (e.g., almonds, walnuts), mushrooms, eggs, spinach, beer (to a lesser extent)\par
Considerations: Small amounts in food. Excessive intake of chromium supplements can lead to toxicity, potentially affecting the liver and kidneys, and/or may cause gastrointestinal issues, including nausea, diarrhea, and abdominal discomfort. These side effects are typically associated with higher supplemental doses rather than food sources. Chromium can interact with certain medications, particularly those for diabetes, by enhancing the effect of insulin or lowering blood sugar levels too much. Potential risk of hypoglycemia in diabetics\par
Conditions Benefited: Type 2 diabetes. PCOS. Metabolic syndrome. High cholesterol and heart disease. Obesity. Metabolic health and inflammation \par
\par
\b Cinnamon Extract \b0\par
Benefits: Supports healthy blood sugar regulation, insulin sensitivity, and metabolic function. Contains antioxidants that reduce oxidative stress and inflammation.\par
Sources: Ceylon (true cinnamon) or cassia bark extract; capsules or tinctures.\par
Considerations: Ceylon has lower coumarin content (safer for long-term use). High doses of cassia may stress the liver. Best taken with food. Can potentiate blood sugar-lowering medications.\par
Conditions Benefited: Type 2 diabetes, insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, inflammation.\par
\par
\b Cissus Quadrangularis\b0\par
Benefits: Supports bone healing, joint integrity, ligament repair, and reduces inflammation; may support weight management and cortisol balance\par
Sources: Extracted from a vine used in Ayurveda; available in powdered, capsule, or tea form\par
Considerations: Look for standardized extracts (e.g., 2.5% ketosterones). Can cause GI discomfort in high doses\par
Conditions Benefited: Joint pain, bone fractures, muscle soreness, metabolic stress\par
\par
\b Citicoline (CDP-Choline)\b0\par
Benefits: Supports brain energy, memory, focus, and synthesis of phospholipids for cell membranes; enhances dopamine receptor function\par
Sources: Synthesized compound available in powder, capsule, or liquid form\par
Considerations: Well-tolerated; works synergistically with phosphatidylserine and omega-3s. May slightly increase blood pressure\par
Conditions Benefited: Brain fog, cognitive fatigue, neurodegenerative diseases, ADHD\par
\par
\b Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports mitochondrial energy production. Improves heart health, reduces oxidative stress\par
Sources: Fatty fish, organ meats, spinach, broccoli\par
Considerations: Ubiquinol (explained later) is more bioavailable, especially for older individuals. Take with a fat-containing meal. Can interact with statin medications (may be depleted by them)\par
Conditions Benefited: Heart disease. Migraines. Chronic fatigue. Neurodegenerative diseases. Fibromyalgia\par
\par
\b\lang9 Collagen (Amino Acid) \b0\par
Benefits: Skin health and anti-aging. Joint and cartilage support. Bone strength. Hair and nail growth. Gut health. Muscle recovery and performance\lang1033 . \lang9 Wound healing\par
Sources: bone broth, fish skin and scales, chicken skin and cartilage, gelatin, egg whites\par
Considerations: Pair with Vitamin C to stimulate collagen synthesis. Avoid excess sugar and processed foods, they damage collagen by causing glycation. There's no plant-based collagen, but you can support collagen production with: Vitamin C, silica, zinc and copper\par
Conditions Benefited: Osteoarthritis and joint pain. Skin aging and wrinkles. Osteoporosis and bone health. \lang1033 L\lang9 eaky gut and digestive issues. Hair loss. Post-surgery and injury recovery\par
\lang1033\par
\b Comfrey (essential oil, folk remedy) \b0\par
Benefits: Traditionally used for healing bones, sprains, and bruises topically\par
Sources: Salves, creams, poultices\par
Considerations: Not for internal use\f1\emdash contains liver-toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids\par
Conditions Benefited: Bone healing, bruising, soft tissue injuries, sprains\par
\f0\par
\b Cordyceps\par
\b0 Benefits: Improves oxygen utilization and ATP production. Used traditionally to support stamina and immune function\par
Sources: Cordyceps sinensis or militaris (capsules, powders, teas)\par
Considerations: May affect blood sugar or immune modulation. Use standardized extracts for consistency\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue, athletic performance, libido, immune dysregulation\par
\par
\b Creatine (Monohydrate, HCL, Kre-Alkalyn) (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Enhances ATP production and muscle strength. Improves cognitive function and energy levels\par
Sources: Red meat, fish. As a supplement powder\par
Considerations: Can be taken at any time of day; post-workout with carbs may enhance absorption. May slightly increase water retention and dehydration. Safe for kidneys in healthy individuals but should be monitored in those with kidney disease\par
Conditions Benefited: Muscle growth. Chronic fatigue. Cognitive decline. Neurodegenerative diseases\par
\lang9\par
\b\lang1033 Curcumin (Antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: Polyphenol with anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and immune-modulating properties. Neuroprotection. Supports cardiovascular health. May improve insulin sensitivity. Potential anti-cancer properties\par
Sources: Tumeric. Powders, capsules\par
Considerations: Poor natural bioavailability, take with black pepper (piperine) - increases absorption by ~2000%.\tab Generally safe, but high doses may cause GI upset or interact with medications. May interact with blood thinners, diabetes medications (enhances effect, Chemotherapy drugs (speak to oncologist first). High-dose supplements are not recommended during pregnancy without medical guidance\par
Conditions Benefited: Osteoarthritis & joint pain - as effective as NSAIDs in some trials. Rheumatoid arthritis. IBD (Crohn\f1\rquote\f0 s, ulcerative colitis). Metabolic syndrome/Diabetes. Heart disease. Cognitive decline/Alzheimer\f1\rquote\f0 s. Depression. Cancer (supportive - research ongoing\par
\b\par
Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid)\par
\b0 Benefits: Boosts immunity, antioxidant, supports collagen production, immune function and skin health. Aids in collagen production and wound healing\par
Sources: Citrus fruits, bell peppers, strawberries, broccoli. Capsules, powders \par
Considerations: Enhances iron absorption. Large doses may cause stomach upset. Best taken with food for optimal absorption\par
Conditions Benefited: Immune support. Skin health. Cardiovascular health\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 D\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Dandelion Root\b0\par
Benefits: Mild diuretic and liver detox aid. May support digestion and hormone regulation\par
Sources: Teas, tinctures, capsules, roasted for coffee alternatives\par
Considerations: Avoid with gallstones or diuretics. May cause allergic reaction in those sensitive to daisies or ragweed\par
Conditions Benefited: Water retention, sluggish digestion, mild acne or PMS\par
\par
\b D-Ribose\b0\par
Benefits: Enhances ATP production and reduces fatigue. Supports heart function and energy levels\par
Sources: Mushrooms, organ meats (liver, heart), dairy products\par
Conditions Benefited: Heart health. Muscle Recovery. Fibromyalgia. CFS/ME\par
Considerations: Works well with CoQ10, Magnesium, and Acetyl L-Carnitine for energy support. Can lower blood sugar levels, so diabetics should monitor glucose levels. May cause mild digestive discomfort in some individuals. Best taken on an empty stomach or with meals to enhance and avoid blood sugar drops. Often dosed at 5g, 1-3 times per day, depending on energy needs\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb480\sl276\slmult1\b\lang9 Diamine Oxidase (DAO) (Enzyme)\b0\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Benefits: Helps break down dietary histamine, reducing histamine-related symptoms like headaches, flushing, or digestive distress\par
Sources: Extracted from porcine kidneys; available in capsule or tablet form, often with other histamine-lowering nutrients\par
Considerations: Should be taken just before high-histamine meals. Not a long-term fix for MCAS. Unsuitable for vegans due to animal source. May not be halal/kosher\par
Conditions Benefited: Histamine intolerance, MCAS, IBS, allergic conditions\lang1033\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b Vitamin D (D2: Ergocalciferol, D3: Cholecalciferol)\par
\b0 Benefits: Supports calcium absorption\lang9 , essential for bone health, immune function, and mood regulation. Anti-inflammatory. Deficiency is linked to increased risk of depression\lang1033\par
Sources: Sunlight, fatty fish, fortified dairy, eggs \lang9 and cereals\lang1033\par
Considerations: Requires fat for absorption. Works with calcium and magnesium. \lang9 High doses can interfere with calcium balance and potentially cause kidney issues, especially when combined with other supplements affecting calcium\lang1033\par
Conditions Benefited: Bone health. Immune function. Depression. Cardiovascular health\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 E\b0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs24\par
\b Echinacea \lang9 (Adaptogen)\lang1033  (Antioxidant)\par
\b0 Benefits: Respiratory infections. Wound healing and inflammation. \lang9 Improves energy, enhances immune function, and increases stamina\par
Sources: Capsules, tinctures, tea, lozenges\par
Considerations: May not be suitable for autoimmune conditions (could overstimulate the immune system). Can cause allergic reactions in those sensitive to ragweed, chrysanthemums, marigolds, daisies\par
Source: Root of the Eleuthero plant\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue. Immune system support. Stress management\par
\b\lang1033\par
Elderberry\b0\par
Benefits: Rich in antioxidants (anthocyanins); may support immune response and reduce cold/flu symptoms\par
Sources: Syrups, capsules, gummies, teas (from berries or flowers)\par
Considerations: Raw berries can be toxic\f1\emdash must be cooked. Not for autoimmune disease without professional guidance\par
Conditions Benefited: Viral infections, immune boost, cold prevention\b\f0\par
\par
Vitamin E (Alpha-Tocopherol) (Antioxidant)\par
\b0 Benefits: Antioxidant. Supports skin and heart health. Cardiovascular health (protects against oxidative damage). Neurological protection. Immune function\par
Sources: Nuts, seeds, green leafy vegetables, barley, vegetable oils (like sunflower, wheat germ, rice bran and safflower oils)\par
Considerations: Fat-soluble. High doses may thin blood\par
Conditions Benefited: Dermatological conditions. Neurological and cognitive disorders. Cardiovascular health. Support in high-oxidative-stress states\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 F\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Fiber\par
\b0 Benefits: Improves digestive health. Blood sugar regulation. Cardiovascular health. Gut health. Weight management and reduces cholesterol levels\par
Sources: Fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes, and nuts. Soluble (psyllium, inulin) and insoluble (wheat bran, cellulose)\par
Considerations: Soluble fiber dissolves in water and forms a gel, slowing digestion. Insoluble fiber adds bulk to stool and promotes movement through the intestines. Fiber isn't absorbed by the body but is essential for digestive function and gut health. Adequate water intake is crucial when increasing fiber to prevent digestive issues like bloating or constipation\par
Conditions Benefited: Digestive issues (IBS, constipation, diverticulitis). High cholesterol. Blood sugar regulation (diabetes, metabolic syndrome). Gut dysbiosis\par
\par
\b\f1 Fenugreek\b0\par
Benefits: Supports blood sugar regulation, digestion, and may enhance milk production during lactation\par
Sources: Seeds (capsules, teas, powders)\par
Considerations: May affect thyroid or blood sugar medications. Causes maple-like body odor in some users\par
Conditions Benefited: Diabetes, digestive sluggishness, breastfeeding support\par
\f0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 G\cf1\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\par
\b GABA (Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid) (Neurotransmitter) \b0\par
Benefits: Primary calming neurotransmitter; reduces excitability in the nervous system; promotes relaxation, sleep, and anxiety relief\par
Sources: Available as powder or capsules; also found in fermented foods (small amounts)\par
Considerations: Oral GABA may not cross the blood\f1\endash\f0 brain barrier well; best used in liposomal, pharmaGABA, or high-dose forms\par
Conditions Benefited: Anxiety, insomnia, overstimulation, stress-related disorders\par
\par
\b Ginger (Zingiber officinale)\b0\par
Benefits: Anti-inflammatory, anti-nausea, digestive support, blood sugar modulation, circulation enhancer\par
Sources: Root powder, extract, capsules, or fresh juice\par
Considerations: Can thin blood slightly; may interact with anticoagulants. Best taken with food\par
Conditions Benefited: Nausea, arthritis, muscle pain, indigestion\par
\par
\b Ginkgo Biloba\b0\par
Benefits: Improves blood flow and oxygenation to the brain; enhances memory and cognitive function; antioxidant activity\par
Sources: Leaf extract, standardized to 24% flavone glycosides and 6% terpene lactones\par
Considerations: May interact with blood thinners; avoid pre-surgery. Start low, go slow\par
Conditions Benefited: Cognitive decline, brain fog, tinnitus, poor circulation\par
\par
\b\lang9 Ginseng (Panax ginseng) (Adaptogen) (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Improves physical endurance, boosts energy, and supports cognitive function. Supports immune function. Helps with stress and fatigue\par
Sources: Ginseng root, tea, and supplements\par
Considerations: Can be stimulating - take early in the day\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue and Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Brain Fog and Cognitive Decline. Stress and Adrenal Support. Immune System Weakness\par
\f1\lang1033\par
\b Glucomannan\b0\par
Benefits: Soluble fiber that promotes fullness, supports blood sugar balance, and relieves constipation\par
Sources: Derived from konjac root; found in capsules, powders, or shirataki noodles\par
Considerations: Take with plenty of water to prevent choking. Can interfere with absorption of some medications\par
Conditions Benefited: Constipation, appetite control, weight management\f0\lang9\par
\par
\b\lang1033 Glutamine (amino acid) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports gut health, gut lining and intestinal healing. Aids in muscle recovery and immune function\par
Sources: Powder, capsules\par
Considerations: Can raise ammonia levels in those with liver or kidney disease. Should be taken with food for better absorption\par
Conditions Benefited: Gut issues (leaky gut, IBS, IBD). Muscle recovery (after workouts, chronic illness muscle wasting). Immune function support. Healing after surgery or injury\par
\par
\b Glutathione (Antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: A powerful antioxidant that helps detoxify the liver, supports immune function, and protects cells from oxidative stress. Supports mitochondrial function\par
Sources: NAC is a precursor of glutathione. Found in foods like spinach, avocado, and asparagus. Available as an IV also. Glycine promotes glutathione production\par
Considerations: Oral glutathione has low bioavailability due to digestive breakdown; liposomal forms can improve absorption. Taking it with a fat source or in liposomal form increases absorption. High doses may lead to side effects like stomach upset. May cause detox symptoms (headache, fatigue)\par
Conditions Benefited: Neurological diseases (Parkinson\f1\rquote\f0 s, Alzheimer\f1\rquote\f0 s). Autoimmune conditions. Mitochondrial dysfunction. Chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Detoxification (heavy metals, mold exposure)\par
\cf2\b\fs32\par
\cf0\fs24 Glycine (Amino Acid) (Detox)\par
\b0 Benefits: Non-essential amino acid (body can produce it, but supplemental amounts can be beneficial). Vital in collagen synthesis, neurotransmission, detoxification, and cellular repair. Improves sleep quality. Supports joint and skin health. Liver support: Promotes glutathione production and phase II detox. Neuroprotective. Blood sugar regulation. Anti-inflammatory. Cognitive support\par
Sources: Gelatin and collagen-rich foods: bone broth, skin, tendons., animal protein (especially pork, chicken skin). Powder, capsules, or as part of collagen blends\par
Considerations: May lower blood pressure or blood sugar: Use caution if taking related medications. Too much may cause nausea or GI discomfort. Discuss with a doctor before using high doses, especially for those with renal insufficiency\par
Conditions Benefited: Insomnia or poor sleep quality. Joint pain or osteoarthritis. Leaky gut or digestive repair. Fatty liver, NAFLD. Type 2 diabetes or insulin resistance. Anxiety and neurological disorders. Detox overload or low glutathione levels. Cognitive impairment, ADHD\par
\par
\b Green Tea Extract (Epigallocatechin gallate - EGCG) (Antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: Antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, supports fat metabolism, cognitive protection, and liver health\par
Sources: Extracted from Camellia sinensis leaves; standardized for EGCG content\par
Considerations: Take with food to avoid stomach upset; can be stimulating due to caffeine content\par
Conditions Benefited: Obesity, cardiovascular health, cancer prevention, cognitive aging\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 H\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b\f1 Hawthorn Berry\b0\par
Benefits: Improves blood flow, strengthens heart muscle, and reduces anxiety. Traditionally used for cardiovascular health\par
Sources: Berries, leaves, and flowers in teas, tinctures, and capsules\par
Considerations: May interact with blood pressure or heart medications. Effects are gentle but cumulative\par
Conditions Benefited: Mild heart conditions, high blood pressure, anxiety\par
\b\f0\par
Hesperidin\par
\b0 Benefits: Citrus bioflavonoid; supports blood vessel integrity, reduces inflammation, enhances vitamin C absorption\par
Sources: Derived from citrus peels; available in powder or capsule form\par
Considerations: Often combined with other flavonoids; best taken with food. Mild anticoagulant effects\par
Conditions Benefited: Chronic venous insufficiency, hemorrhoids, cardiovascular support, inflammation\par
\par
\b Histidine (EAA) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports histamine production, brain function, and wound healing. Is essential for immune function, gut health, and neurotransmitter production (converts into histamine)\par
Sources: Fish, meat, eggs, dairy, legumes, whole grains\par
Considerations: Water-soluble. Caution/supervision is advised for those with excessive levels of iron or copper, mast cell disorders or mastocytosis, gastrointestinal issues, kidney or liver dysfunction, allergic conditions or autoimmune disease, histamine sensitivity or intolerance. It can be taken with or without food, though taking it with a protein-rich meal may help reduce any chance of histamine-like reactions in sensitive individuals\par
Conditions Benefited: Cognitive function. Anemia and fatigue. Joint and muscle recovery. Metabolic detoxification\par
\par
\b\lang9 Holy Basil (Tulsi) (Adaptogen)\b0\par
Benefits: Known for its ability to reduce stress, balance blood sugar, and support the immune system. Anti-inflammatory\par
Sources: Leaves of the Tulsi plant, tea, tinctures, capsules\par
Considerations: Immune-modulating \f1\emdash  \f0 may either calm or stimulate immune activity\lang1033 , people with autoimmune conditions should be cautious, starting low and monitoring carefully. \lang9 It can lower blood sugar. Those with hyperthyroidism should be cautious. It may benefit hypothyroid individuals in some cases. May affect clotting, thin blood and lower blood pressure. Avoid if attempting to conceive\par
Conditions Benefited: Stress, anxiety, metabolic disorders, and immune deficiencies\par
\par
\b\lang1033 Hyaluronic Acid \b0\par
Benefits: Promotes joint lubrication, skin hydration, and tissue healing; draws moisture to connective tissues\par
Sources: Produced via bacterial fermentation; available in powder and capsules\par
Considerations: Topical: Used for skin hydration and wound healing (creams, serums). Oral: For joint and connective tissue support (capsules, powders).\par
Considerations: Choose high-molecular weight for joints, low for skin (though inflammation risk exists at very low weights); low-molecular weight may increase absorption but can be pro-inflammatory in high doses\par
Conditions Benefited: Joint pain, osteoarthritis, dry skin, wound healing\par
\lang9\par
\b\f1\lang1033 Hydrogen Water\f0  (Antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: Delivers molecular hydrogen, a potential antioxidant; may reduce inflammation and fatigue\par
Sources: Canned hydrogen water, tablets that dissolve in water\par
Considerations: Limited evidence. Drink soon after opening for potency\par
Conditions Benefited: Oxidative stress, exercise recovery, fatigue, mitochondrial dysfunction\lang9\par
\par
\b\lang1033 5-HTP (5-Hydroxytryptophan)\b0\par
Benefits: Precursor to serotonin\f1\emdash\f0 may support mood and sleep. May help with depression, anxiety, and migraines\par
Sources: Capsules, tablets\par
Considerations: Do not combine with SSRIs or MAOIs (risk of serotonin syndrome)\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression and anxiety. Insomnia and sleep disorders. Migraines. Fibromyalgia\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\fs40 I\fs24\par
\b\f1\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Inositol\b0\par
Benefits: Supports insulin sensitivity and ovarian health. Also modulates serotonin and GABA\emdash used for mood and anxiety\par
Sources: Found in fruits and grains; available as myo-inositol and D-chiro-inositol powders or capsules\par
Considerations: High doses may cause GI upset. May interact with psychiatric meds. Best taken with food\par
Conditions Benefited: PCOS, anxiety, OCD, insulin resistance\b\f0\par
\par
Iodine\b0\par
Benefits: Essential for thyroid hormone production. Supports metabolism and brain function\par
Sources: Iodized salt, seaweed, potassium iodide supplements, dairy products\par
Considerations: Highly bio-available from food and supplements, take with food. Excess iodine can cause thyroid dysfunction. Avoid high doses unless prescribed. Take with selenium\par
Conditions Benefited: Thyroid disorders (hypothyroidism, Hashimoto\f1\rquote\f0 s. Hormonal imbalances. Cognitive function (brain fog, mental clarity)\par
\par
\b Iron\b0\par
Benefits: Essential for red blood cell production\par
Sources: Red meat, beans, spinach. Powders, capsules\par
Considerations: Enhanced by Vitamin C, inhibited by calcium. Excess can be toxic\par
Conditions Benefited: Anemia and fatigue (essential for red blood cell production). Cognitive function and mental clarity. Immune system function. Restless leg syndrome (linked to low iron levels). Also beneficial for Pregnancy and fetal development. Plays a supportive role in menstruation\par
 \par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 J\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Jasmine\b0\par
Benefits: Calming effects on the nervous system. Supports digestion and stress relief\par
Sources: Jasmine flowers , Tea, essential oil\par
Considerations: Essential oil should not be ingested. Processing in the Body: Aromatic compounds interact with neurotransmitters to induce relaxation. Not commonly associated with adverse effects. May cause allergies in sensitive individuals\par
Condition benefited: Anxiety and stress relief. Insomnia and sleep disturbances. Digestive issues (bloating, cramps)\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 K\b0\fs22\lang9\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\fs24\par
\f1\lang1033 Kava Kava\b0\par
Benefits: Potent relaxant and anti-anxiety remedy; promotes calm and sociability\par
Sources: Root-based teas, tinctures, capsules\par
Considerations: Can affect liver function\emdash avoid long-term or with alcohol. Not legal in all countries\par
Conditions Benefited: Anxiety, insomnia, social tension\par
\b\f0\lang9\par
Kombucha\b0\par
Benefits: Contains probiotics, may aid digestion and gut flora.\par
Sources: Fermented tea drinks (check sugar content).\par
Considerations: Not for histamine-sensitive individuals. Can cause bloating.\par
Conditions Benefited: Mild digestive support (if tolerated).\par
\b\lang1033\par
Vitamin K (K1, K2)\par
\b0 Benefits: Supports blood clotting, bone health\par
Sources: Leafy greens, fermented foods, supplements\par
Considerations: Fat-soluble. Can interfere with blood thinners\par
Conditions Benefited: Bone health (supports calcium absorption into bones). Cardiovascular health (helps prevent arterial calcification). Blood clotting (essential for coagulation and wound healing). Brain function and neuroprotection\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 L\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b L-Arginine (Amino Acid) \b0\par
Benefits: Necessary for making proteins and beneficial for circulation in the body. Stimulates release of growth hormone, insulin and other substances in the body. Wound healing and immune function. Exercise Tolerance or Recovery (limited evidence in fatigue syndromes)\par
Sources: Red meat, poultry, fish and dairy. Also in supplement form\par
Considerations: L-Citrulline: Converts to arginine in the body, often better absorbed and longer-lasting. L-Ornithine: Sometimes stacked with arginine for liver detox or athletic support. Caution advised for those with herpes, hypotension, kidney or liver dysfunction, asthma/respiratory issues, sepsis, or cancer (Some tumors may use arginine to promote growth, though this depends on tumor type and context)\par
Conditions Benefited: Chest pain. Cardiovascular health (supports nitric oxide production for vasodilation). Erectile dysfunction (improves blood flow). Athletic performance and muscle recovery. Blood pressure regulation (may lower high blood pressure)\par
\f1\par
\b L-Carnitine\b0\par
Benefits: Facilitates fatty acid transport into mitochondria; may support energy metabolism and heart health\par
Sources: Red meat, fish; L-carnitine tartrate or acetyl-L-carnitine supplements\par
Considerations: May cause mild GI upset or a fishy odor. May interact with thyroid meds or anticoagulants\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue, heart disease, male fertility\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb480\sl276\slmult1\b\f0\lang9 L-Citrulline (Amino Acid) \b0\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Benefits: Improves blood flow, enhances nitric oxide production, supports circulation, muscle recovery, and energy\par
Sources: watermelon; supplemented as L-citrulline or citrulline malate in powders or capsules\par
Considerations: May lower blood pressure. Can cause GI upset in high doses. Monitor if taking nitrates or blood pressure meds\par
Conditions Benefited|: POTS, fatigue, erectile dysfunction, cardiovascular support, exercise intolerance\par
\par
\b L-Ornithine\b0\par
Benefits: Supports ammonia detoxification through the urea cycle; may reduce fatigue, improve sleep quality, and enhance physical recovery. Often used for liver support and performance endurance\par
Sources: Non-protein amino acid synthesized in the body and found in small amounts in meat and dairy; available in powder or capsule form as L-ornithine or L-ornithine HCl\par
Considerations: Best taken on an empty stomach for absorption. Often combined with L-arginine or L-citrulline. High doses may cause mild GI discomfort\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue, liver dysfunction, poor detox capacity, post-exercise recovery, hyperammonemia\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\lang1033 L-Tyrosine (Amino acid) \b0\par
Benefits: Precursor to dopamine, norepinephrine, and thyroid hormones; supports alertness, motivation, and stress resilience\par
Sources: Isolated amino acid, available in pure powder or capsules\par
Considerations: Take away from protein-rich meals; may interact with thyroid meds or MAOIs\par
Conditions Benefited: Brain fog, stress, fatigue, low mood\par
\par
\b Lemon Balm\b0\par
Benefits: Anti-anxiety. Antiviral (used against herpes). Digestive aid. Cognitive support. Menstrual relief\par
Sources: Tea, tinctures, capsules, topical, essential oil\par
Considerations: Take with valerian or passionflower for enhanced sedative effect/sleep support. Pair with peppermint or chamomile for calming digestion. Those with hypothyroidism or Hashimoto's should use caution and monitor symptoms. Can increase drowsiness and brain fog in fatigue syndromes. May enhance effects of sedative medication. Can lower blood pressure. It has antiviral activity, particularly against herpes viruses (HSV-1/HSV-2). May be beneficial for flare prevention. Immune-modulating effects are mild and variable\f1\emdash\f0 worth monitoring in autoimmune cases\par
Conditions Benefited: Anxiety and stress reduction. Insomnia and sleep quality. Herpes labialis (cold sores) - topically. Digestive issues. May benefit dementia /Alzheimer's. Menstrual and premenstrual symptoms\par
\par
\b\lang9 Lion's Mane (Adaptogen) (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Neuroprotection. cognitive function. Mood regulation\par
Sources: Lion's mane mushroom. Dried as teas/supplements\par
Considerations: Combining it with other supplements affecting cognition or the nervous system (e.g., nootropics) may have synergistic effects. Caution for those on medication for mood disorders/neurological conditions\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression and anxiety. \lang1033 Cognitive decline. Neuropathy. Gut health. Immune function\par
\par
\b Lithium Orotate (nootropic, mineral) \b0\par
Benefits: Neuroprotective at low doses; mood stabilizer; may reduce impulsivity and anxiety\par
Sources: Mineral salt form of lithium in capsule/tablet\par
Considerations: Not the same as prescription lithium carbonate. Safe at microdose levels (\f2\u8804?\f0 5 mg)\par
Conditions Benefited: Bipolar tendencies (adjunct only), irritability, suicidal ideation, OCD, anxiety\lang1033\par
\par
\b\lang9 Luteolin (Antioxidant) \b0\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Benefits: Potent flavonoid with antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and mast cell-stabilizing properties; modulates immune response, reduces neuroinflammation, and may support mitochondrial health\par
Sources: Found in celery, parsley, thyme, chamomile, green peppers; available as an isolated extract in powder or capsule form\par
Considerations: Often paired with quercetin or rutin for synergistic mast cell support; low bioavailability\f1\emdash\f0 best taken with fat and/or piperine. May cause mild GI upset in sensitive individuals\par
Conditions Benefited: MCAS, histamine intolerance, neuroinflammation, allergies, autoimmune flares, cognitive dysfunction\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\par
\b Lysine (EAA)\b0  \par
Benefits: Supports collagen production, immune function, and calcium absorption. Lysine is an essential amino acid needed for protein synthesis, immune support, and neurotransmitter function. It plays a key role in preventing viral infections and promoting tissue repair. Supports mental health and mood\par
Sources: Fish, meat, eggs, dairy. Vegan: tofu, quinoa, lentils, pumpkin seeds, black beans\par
Considerations: Best absorbed with Vitamin C (supports collagen production). High doses may cause digestive upset. May interact with calcium metabolism\f1\emdash\f0 monitor intake if taking calcium supplements\par
Conditions Benefited: Herpes and cold sores. Osteoporosis. Anxiety and stress. Supports serotonin production. Wound healing and skin health\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 M\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\lang9 Maca Root (Adaptogen)\b0\par
Benefits: Boosts energy, improves mood, enhances stamina, and balances hormones\par
Source: Maca root, powder, tincture, capsules, extracts\par
Considerations: Could interfere with iodine uptake. Caution for those with autoimmune diseases, hormone-sensitive conditions, high blood pressure, insomnia or anxiety. Can cause bloating or gas\par
Conditions benefited: Fatigue, mood disorders, sexual dysfunction, and hormonal imbalances\par
\lang1033\par
\b\lang9 Magnesium (Various Forms) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports muscle and nerve function, heart health, and is crucial for over 300 biochemical processes in the body. It can promote relaxation and improve sleep quality. Energy production. Prevents cramps, spasms and tremors. Blood sugar regulation. Anti-inflammatory\par
Sources: \lang1033 Nuts and seeds, leafy greens, legumes, whole grains, fruits, seafood, dark chocolate\lang9\par
Considerations: Excessive magnesium may cause digestive issues. Can interact with certain medications like antibiotics and diuretics. Works well with Vitamin D and calcium. \lang1033 Despite its importance, many people have a deficiency due to poor diet, stress, or medical conditions. Vitamin D enhances magnesium absorption. A deficiency in Vitamin D can lead to poor magnesium levels. Vitamin B6 helps transport magnesium into cells. Protein helps the body absorb and retain magnesium. Large amounts can compete with magnesium for absorption. Alcohol and caffeine increase magnesium excretion through urine. Diuretics: Can deplete magnesium levels. Antacids and Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs): Reduce magnesium absorption over time. Certain antibiotics can interfere with magnesium levels. Blood pressure medications may be affected by magnesium levels\par
Conditions Benefited: Insomnia. Muscle cramps. Migraines. Heart disease. High blood pressure\par
Choosing the correct magnesium:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\i Magnesium Citrate \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Digestion, constipation relief, muscle relaxation, reducing migraines\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Has a mild laxative effect, which makes it great for digestion but not ideal for those with sensitive stomachs\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium Glycinate \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Anxiety, stress, insomnia, muscle relaxation\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Bound to glycine, an amino acid that promotes relaxation. Less likely to cause digestive issues\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium L-Threonate \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Cognitive function, focus, memory, and brain health\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Penetrates the blood-brain barrier, making it ideal for neurological support. Used in research for Alzheimer\f1\rquote\f0 s and cognitive decline\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium Malate \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Energy production, muscle recovery, chronic fatigue, fibromyalgia\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Malic acid aids in ATP (energy) production, making it beneficial for those who feel fatigued or sluggish\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium Taurate \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Heart health, blood pressure regulation, relaxation, sleep\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Bound to taurine, which has a calming effect on the cardiovascular system. Supports healthy blood vessel function\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium Chloride \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Topical applications: for muscle recovery, cramps and relaxation\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Found in some oils and lotions\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium Sulfate (Epsom Salt) \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Topical applications for muscle soreness, cramps, relaxation, detox baths\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Commonly used in baths to help relieve muscle tension and inflammation. Oral intake can cause diarrhea\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium Oxide \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: For digestion and occasional constipation relief\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Poor bioavailability. Often used in laxatives but not the best for magnesium replenishment\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Magnesium Orotate \b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Cellular energy production, muscle recovery, athletic performance\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Supports heart health and is often used by athletes for endurance\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b Manganese (Antioxidant?) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports metabolism. Bone health (supports collagen formation and bone density). Joint and cartilage repair. Antioxidant support. Brain health and neurotransmitter function\par
Sources: Nuts, whole grains, tea\par
Considerations: Excess calcium and iron may inhibit absorption. High doses may be toxic\par
Conditions Benefited: Arthritis. Post-Surgery and injury recovery. Brain fog. Cognitive decline\par
\par
\b Marjoram \b0\par
Benefits: Relaxes muscles and eases spasms (antispasmodic). Calms the nervous system and supports restful sleep. May reduce inflammation and relieve joint or menstrual pain. Mild digestive aid for bloating or gas.\par
Sources: Fresh or dried herb (used in teas or cooking). Essential oil (steam-distilled from leaves and flowers). Capsules and tinctures also available.\par
Considerations: Essential oil must be diluted before topical use. Avoid during pregnancy unless advised by a professional (especially oil). Can cause drowsiness. Use with caution if already taking sedatives or muscle relaxants.\par
Conditions Benefited: Muscle spasms and cramps. Menstrual pain. Anxiety and insomnia. Digestive discomfort. Joint pain and stiffness.\par
\par
\b\lang9 Melatonin (Antioxidant)\b0\par
Benefits: Regulate sleep-wake cycles. It is often used as a supplement to treat insomnia or jet lag. Sleep regulation - helps improve sleep onset and quality, particularly for those with sleep disorders or disrupted sleep cycles. Antioxidant. May support immune function and protect cells from oxidative damage\par
Sources: \lang1033 Tart cherries, goji berries, grapes (especially red/purple), mushrooms, bananas, pistachios, oats. \lang9 Supplements more commonly taken\par
Considerations: Melatonin can interact with medications that affect the central nervous system (e.g., sedatives, anticonvulsants, or certain antidepressants). Causes drowsiness - should not be combined with sedatives, alcohol, or drugs. Melatonin in prescription form is typically vegetarian but not always vegan, depending on the source\par
Conditions Benefited: Insomnia and sleep disorders (regulates circadian rhythm). Jet lag and shift work sleep issues. Migraines and cluster headaches. Immune system support (may help with autoimmune conditions. Neurological conditions (potential benefits for Alzheimer\f1\rquote\f0 s and Parkinson\f1\rquote\f0 s)\lang1033\par
\par
\b Metformin\b0\par
Benefits: Regulates blood sugar by increasing insulin sensitivity.  Reduces inflammation and oxidative stress. May support mitochondrial function\par
Sources: Tablets (immediate and extended-release), liquid\par
Considerations: Primarily a medication, but used off-label for various conditions. It reduces glucose production in the liver and increases glucose uptake in muscles. Can cause gastrointestinal distress (nausea, diarrhea). May lead to B12 deficiency over long-term use\f1\emdash\f0 consider supplementation. Avoid if kidney function is impaired\par
Conditions Benefited: Type 2 diabetes. Insulin resistance (PCOS, metabolic syndrome). Mitochondrial dysfunction (ME/CFS, Long COVID). Anti-aging and longevity research\par
\par
\b Methionine (EAA) \par
\b0 Benefits: Helps with detoxification, liver health, and antioxidant production (glutathione), the formation of cysteine and taurine and is involved in methylation processes (important for DNA function). Supports mood and brain function. Anti-inflammatory\par
Sources: Meat, fish, eggs, dairy. Vegan sources: brazil nuts, sunflower seeds, soybeans, spirulina\par
Considerations: Best absorbed with B vitamins (B6, B12, folate) and magnesium\f1\emdash\f0 supports methylation. Excess methionine can raise homocysteine levels, increasing the risk of heart disease. Pair with antioxidants (Vitamin C and E) to prevent homocysteine buildup. Excess methionine can raise homocysteine levels, increasing the risk of heart disease. May worsen oxidative stress in some individuals if not balanced with antioxidants\par
Conditions Benefited: Liver disease and detox support. Hair, skin and nail health. Mood disorders. Joint health (Arthritis, Osteoarthritis) - SAMe reduces inflammation and pain\par
\par
\b Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM)\b0\par
Benefits: Reduces joint pain, muscle soreness, inflammation; supports collagen formation and detoxification\par
Sources: Organosulfur compound found in plants; produced synthetically for supplements\par
Considerations: Start with small doses (1 g) to assess tolerance; sulfur taste/odor is normal\par
Conditions Benefited: Joint pain, arthritis, exercise recovery, hair/skin/nail health\par
\par
\b\lang9 Milk thistle (Silybum marianum/silymarin) \par
\b0 Benefits: Liver detoxification \lang1033 funtion and regeneration\lang9 . Protects against toxins and alcohol damage. Supports blood sugar regulation. Skin health. Possibly neuroprotective\par
Sources: Capsules, extracts, or tea\par
Considerations: Best taken with fat-containing meals for absorption. Micronized extracts improve uptake. Some drug interactions. May cause GI upset. Can worsen obstructive cholestasis/gallstones\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatty liver disease (NAFLD)\lang1033 . \lang9 Liver Detox and Alcohol Recovery\lang1033 .\lang9  Acne and Skin Conditions\lang1033 . \lang9 Blood Sugar Regulation\lang1033 . \lang9 PCOS and Hormonal Balance. Metabolic Syndrome\par
\par
\b\f1\lang1033 Moringa\b0\par
Benefits: Nutrient-dense plant rich in antioxidants, iron, and amino acids; supports detox and energy\par
Sources: Leaf powders, teas, capsules\par
Considerations: Can lower blood sugar. Use cautiously with hypotension or diabetes meds\par
Conditions Benefited: Nutritional deficiency, inflammation, metabolic health\f0\lang9\par
\lang1033\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 N\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC) (Antioxidant) (Detox) \b0\par
Benefits: Glutathione precursor. Antioxidant. Detoxification. Lung health. Mental health. Immune System Support: Helps fight infections and inflammation\par
Sources: Eggs, poultry, garlic, onions (as cysteine - its precursor). Powders, capsules (as NAC)\par
Considerations: Best absorbed on an empty stomach and taken with Vitamin C for enhanced glutathione production. Can thin blood, so caution with anticoagulant medications. May lower blood pressure when combined with antihypertensive drugs. Helps process toxins, including acetaminophen and alcohol\par
Conditions Benefited: Liver detox and respiratory health. Mental health: OCD, depression, and addiction. Oxidative stress. Long Covid, CFS/ME, Fibromyalgia\par
\par
\b\f1 Nettle Leaf\b0\par
Benefits: Anti-inflammatory and mildly diuretic; supports urinary health and reduces seasonal allergies\par
Sources: Teas, tinctures, capsules\par
Considerations: Can interact with diuretics or blood pressure meds. Stinging form must be dried or cooked\par
Conditions Benefited: Allergies, joint pain, water retention\f0\par
\par
\b Nicotinamide Riboside (NR) \b0\par
Benefits: NAD+ precursor. Energy production and mitochondrial function - increases ATP production. DNA repair. Anti-aging effects. Neuroprotection: Improves brain function and has protective effects on nerve cells. Metabolic support\par
Sources: Milk, yeast, and certain vegetables. Supplements: Available in powder or capsule form\par
Considerations: Best absorbed with a meal. Some may experience mild digestive upset or skin flushing, especially at higher doses initially. May interact with certain medications (e.g., chemotherapy drugs or immunosuppressants). Safety during pregnancy and breastfeeding hasn't been well studied. NAD+ levels can take time to build up, so be patient with results (typically a few weeks)\par
Conditions Benefited: CFS/ME and fatigue. Neurodegenerative diseases. Type 2 Diabetes and Insulin Resistance. Aging-related conditions. Obesity. Metabolic syndrome\par
\par
\b Nicotinamide Mononucleotide (NMN)\b0\par
Benefits: Another NAD+ precursor. Energy production and mitochondrial function - increases ATP production. Anti-aging effects. Neuroprotection: Improves brain function and has protective effects on nerve cells. Metabolic support. Cardiovascular Health\par
Sources: Edamame, broccoli, cucumbers, and avocados. Supplements: Available in powder or capsule form\par
Considerations: Take with food - fat-soluble. May cause mild gastrointestinal discomfort (e.g., bloating or nausea) and headaches. May interact with certain medications, particularly those related to metabolism or inflammation. Those with active cancer, or with autoimmune flares need to be cautious. Safety during pregnancy and breastfeeding hasn't been well studied. NAD+ levels can take time to build up, so be patient with results (typically a few weeks). Stack with resveratrol or pterostilbene - synergistically activates sirtuins, with TMG (Trimethylglycine) - helps balance methylation processes, with CoQ10/Ubiquinol - further supports mitochondrial energy production\par
Conditions Benefited: CFS/ME and fatigue. Fibromyalgia. Long covid. Neurodegenerative diseases. Type 2 Diabetes and Insulin Resistance. Aging-related conditions. Cardiovacular disease. Metabolic syndrome\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 O\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Omega-3 Fatty Acids (EPA, DHA) (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Lowers triglycerides and supports blood vessel function. Brain Function: Essential for memory, cognition, and mood regulation. Anti-Inflammatory and general inflammation. Eye and joint health\par
Sources: Fatty fish (salmon, sardines, mackerel), Flaxseeds, chia seeds (contain ALA, which converts to EPA/DHA), Walnuts, Algal oil (plant-based omega-3). Cod Liver Oil \par
Considerations: Best taken with food, preferably containing fat, to improve absorption. May thin blood, caution if taking anticoagulants. High doses may cause digestive issues. Fish-based sources provide direct EPA and DHA, whereas plant sources contain ALA (which converts inefficiently). Higher DHA is recommended for brain health; higher EPA for inflammation\par
Conditions Benefited: Cardiovascular health. Brain health. Arthritis. Depression. Inflammation. Auto-immune conditions\par
\par
\b Oregano\b0\par
Benefits: Antimicrobial and antifungal properties. Supports gut and immune health\par
Sources: Oil, fresh or dried herb, capsules\par
Considerations: Highly bioavailable. Compounds like carvacrol and thymol are metabolized in the liver and act as antimicrobial agents. Oil is potent\f1\emdash\f0 must be diluted before use. Can cause stomach irritation in large doses. May interact with certain medications\par
Conditions Benefited: Bacterial and fungal infections (candida, SIBO). Immune support. Gut health and dysbiosis. Respiratory conditions\par
   \par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 P\fs24\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb480\sl276\slmult1\lang9 Palmitoylethanolamide (PEA)\b0\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Benefits: Natural anti-inflammatory and pain modulator. Reduces nerve pain, inflammation, and neuroinflammation\par
Sources: Eggs, soy, peanuts (in small amounts); taken as isolated supplement\par
Considerations: Well tolerated. Start low and increase gradually. Often combined with luteolin for MCAS support\par
Conditions Benefited: Chronic pain, fibromyalgia, ME/CFS, neuropathy, MCAS, long COVID\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\lang1033 Phenylalanine (EAA)\b0\par
Benefits: Boosts mood, precursor to dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine - helps with motivation, focus, and mental clarity. Supports thyroid function. Reduces chronic pain - helps regulate natural painkillers (endorphins and enkephalins). Supports cognitive function and alertness\par
Sources: Meat, fish, eggs, dairy. Vegan sources: almonds, soybeans, pumpkin seeds, lentils\par
Considerations: Best absorbed with Vitamin B6 and iron (helps convert it into dopamine). Avoid excess protein with supplementation\f1\emdash\f0 too much can compete with absorption. Not safe for individuals with PKU (Phenylketonuria), a genetic condition. High doses may cause anxiety, jitteriness, or insomnia\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression, ADHD, and brain fog. Chronic pain (fibromyalgia, arthritis). Thyroid Disorders (Hypothyroidism)\lang9\par
\lang1033\par
\b Phosphatidylserine\b0\par
Benefits: Key phospholipid for brain cell membranes; supports memory, cognition, and stress hormone balance\par
Sources: Derived from soy or sunflower lecithin; available in powder or capsules\par
Considerations: Best taken with food/fat for absorption; may reduce cortisol if taken before bed\par
Conditions Benefited: Cognitive decline, ADHD, memory issues, chronic stress\par
\par
\b Piperine (Black Pepper Extract)\b0\par
Benefits: Enhances bioavailability of curcumin, quercetin, and other nutrients; mild digestive stimulant\par
Sources: Extracted from black pepper; standardized to 95% piperine\par
Considerations: Use small doses (5\f1\endash\f0 10 mg); too much may irritate GI tract\par
Conditions Benefited: Poor nutrient absorption, inflammation, digestive sluggishness\par
\b\par
Pomegranate Extract\par
\b0 Benefits: Antioxidant-rich (punicalagins and anthocyanins). Reduces inflammation and oxidative stress. Supports cardiovascular health, skin regeneration, and hormone modulation.\par
Sources: Juice concentrate, capsules, powders standardized to punicalagins.\par
Considerations: May interact with blood pressure or statin medications. Juice is high in sugar\f1\emdash extracts preferred for concentrated effects.\par
Conditions Benefited: Cardiovascular disease, oxidative stress, skin aging, inflammation, hormone balance (esp. post-menopausal).\f0\par
\b\par
\lang9 Potassium (Electrolyte)\b0\par
Benefits: Electrolyte balance. Muscle and nerve function. Can help with jitters or muscle spasms, and mitigating cramps, weakness, and fatigue. Heart health. Blood pressure regulation\par
Sources: Fruits, spinach, potatoes, tomatoes, sweet potatoes, legumes, fish, dairy, whole grains. Powders, capsules. It is commonly administered in oral form (potassium chloride) or through IV infusions in a hospital setting, or in pre-mixed electrolyte supplements\par
Considerations: Excessive potassium can lead to hyperkalemia, a potentially life-threatening condition that can cause heart arrhythmias and muscle weakness. For individuals with kidney disease or heart disease, potassium supplementation must be carefully monitored due to the risk of dangerous levels building up in the body (hyperkalemia). Potassium supplements can interact with medications such as ACE inhibitors, potassium-sparing diuretics, and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), which can increase potassium levels. Potassium plays a role in regulating the body\f1\rquote\f0 s acid-base balance. Individuals with conditions like diabetic ketoacidosis or chronic kidney disease need to manage their potassium intake carefully\par
Conditions Benefited: Arrhythmia, heart disease, cardivascular conditions. Dehydration. Electrolyte imbalance. Hypokalemia. Diabetes. Muscular diseases\par
\par
\b Prebiotics\par
\b0 Benefits: Gut health - \lang1033 feeds good bacteria. \lang9 . Mental health and gut-brain axis. Metabolic \lang1033 h\lang9 ealth\lang1033 . Immune support. Bowel regularity. Weight management. \lang9 Enhanced \lang1033 r\lang9 ecovery in \lang1033 c\lang9 ritical \lang1033 i\lang9 llness or \lang1033 p\lang9 ost-\lang1033 a\lang9 ntibiotics\par
\lang1033 Sources: Fruit, legumes, chicory root, potatoes, rice, peas, whole grains. \lang9 Powders or Capsules standardized to inulin, FOS, GOS, RS, etc.\lang1033  \lang9 Prebiotic Blends combining multiple fibers for broader microbiome support.\lang1033  \lang9 Synbiotics that pair prebiotics with specific probiotic strains\par
Considerations\lang1033 : \lang9 Start \lang1033 l\lang9 ow \lang1033 and\lang9  \lang1033 g\lang9 o \lang1033 s\lang9 low:\lang1033  \lang9 Rapid increases in fermentable fibers can cause gas, bloating, or cramps\f1\emdash\f0 especially in IBS or SIBO. Begin with 2\lang1033 -\lang9 3 g/day and titrate up over several weeks.\lang1033  \lang9 Many prebiotics (inulin, FOS, GOS) are high-FODMAP. People with severe IBS may tolerate resistant starch and beta-glucans better than inulin.\lang1033  \lang9 Adequate fluid intake is essential when increasing fiber to prevent constipation.\lang1033  \lang9 High-fiber prebiotics can interfere with absorption of certain drugs; take medications 1\lang1033 -\lang9 2 hours away from large prebiotic doses.\lang1033  \lang9 While rare, in severely immunosuppressed individuals, rapid microbial shifts could pose risks\f1\emdash\f0 use under medical supervision\par
\lang1033 Conditions Benefited: Gut issues, IBS, IBD \lang9 or constipation\lang1033 . Metabolic syndrome. Type 2 diabetes. NAFLD\lang9\par
\par
\b Probiotics \cf2  \cf0\par
\b0 Benefits: Probiotics support gut health - are good bacteria. Aid digestion. Enhance immune function. May improve mood through the gut-brain axis. Taking specific probiotics like lactobacillus and bifidobacterium strains while on antibiotics helps counterbalance the gut flora disruption caused by antibiotics, supports digestive health, and helps prevent complications like diarrhea or infections\par
Sources: Yogurt, kefir, sauerkraut, kimchi, kombucha. Capsules, powders designed for specific case uses\par
Considerations: Some strains may cause bloating initially. Must be stored properly to maintain potency. May interfere with certain antibiotics or immunosuppressive medications. To maximize the benefit, it's generally recommended to take probiotics a few hours after taking antibiotics. This helps ensure that the antibiotics don\f1\rquote\f0 t kill the probiotics before they have a chance to work. For example, if you take antibiotics in the morning, you might take your probiotic in the afternoon or evening. Taking probiotics daily during and for a few weeks after antibiotic treatment can help rebuild the gut microbiome\lang1033\par
\lang9 Conditions Benefited: Digestive disorders (IBS, IBD, SIBO). Immune function. Skin conditions (eczema, acne). Yeast infections (candida)\par
\par
\b\lang1033 Protein\b0\par
Benefits: Muscle growth and recovery. Wound healing and immune function Blood sugar regulation. Weight management\par
Sources: Various, see below\par
Considerations: Excess protein can strain the kidneys in individuals with pre-existing kidney disease\par
Conditions Benefited: Injury recovery. Chronic fatigue. Weakness. Muscle building\par
Choosing the correct Protein:\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\i Whey Protein (Concentrate/Isolate/Hydrolysate)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Fast absorption, high in essential amino acids.\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Great for post-workout recovery due to rapid absorption. Can cause digestive issues in those with lactose intolerance\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Casein Protein\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Slow-digesting, ideal for overnight muscle repair\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Best before bed for slow release. Can cause digestive issues in those with lactose intolerance\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Collagen Protein\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Supports skin, joints, and gut health\line\line Considerations: Lower in essential amino acids - best taken with Vitamin C to support synthesis\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Beef Protein\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Rich in collagen and gelatin\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: Alternative for those avoiding dairy\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}\b\i Plant-Based Proteins (Pea, Rice, Hemp, Soy, etc.)\b0\i0\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Benefits: Good alternative for vegans/vegetarians\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Considerations: some may lack certain amino acids. Combining sources (e.g., rice + pea protein) ensures a complete amino acid profile\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f1\par
\b PQQ (Pyrroloquinoline Quinone)\b0\par
Benefits: Stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis and reduces oxidative stress\par
Sources: Fermented soy, green tea; supplements in capsule form\par
Considerations: Often stacked with CoQ10 or NAD+ precursors. Long-term use is still under study\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue, cognitive decline, aging-related dysfunction\par
\f0\par
\b Pterostilbene (Antioxidant) \par
\b0 Benefits: Antioxidant and anti-inflammatory. Supports mitochondrial health, protects cells from oxidative stress. May be anti-aging. Anti-cancer properties. Cognitive health. Blood sugar \par
Sources: Blueberries (particularly the skin), grapes, and certain nuts. Supplements: Available in capsule or tablet form, usually derived from blueberry extract\par
Considerations: May interact with blood thinners or anticoagulant medications. Is structurally similar to resveratrol but with greater bioavailability. Should be avoided during pregnancy and breastfeeding due to limited research on safety. Pterostilbene has good bioavailability, so it can be taken with or without food. Consider a break or lower dosage if using long-term, as too much antioxidant supplementation may potentially suppress necessary oxidative processes\par
Conditions Benefited: Fibromyalgia. CFS/ME. Long covid. Autoimmune diseases. Neurodegenerative conditions (Parkinson\f1\rquote\f0 s, Alzheimer\f1\rquote\f0 s). Diabetes/Metabolic syndrome\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 Q\par
\cf1\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b Quercetin (Antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: Polyphenol with anti-inflammatory, anti-histamine and antioxidant properties. Supports immune function and histamine regulation. May help with allergies and respiratory health\par
Sources: Onions, apples, citrus fruits, berries, and leafy greens. Capsules, powder\par
Considerations: Can interact with blood thinners, blood pressure, and some chemotherapy medications. Has low bioavailability, combine with Vitamin C, bromelain, or fats for better absorption\par
Conditions Benefited: Allergies and histamine intolerance (MCAS, hay fever). Inflammation and oxidative stress. Cardiovascular health. Immune support (antiviral effects)\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 R\par
\f1\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0 Raw Honey (Food, folk remedy) \b0\par
Benefits: Natural antimicrobial, prebiotic, and soothing for sore throats and GI irritation. Locally sourced raw honey may help reduce seasonal allergies by exposing the body to trace amounts of regional pollen.\par
Sources: Raw/unpasteurized honey\par
Considerations: Avoid in infants <1 year. High in sugar\par
Conditions Benefited: Sore throat, cough, GI upset, seasonal allergies\par
\b\f1\par
Reishi Mushroom\b0\par
Benefits: Adaptogenic immune modulator; supports stress tolerance, sleep, and liver health\par
Sources: Dried mushroom, capsules, teas, tinctures\par
Considerations: May lower blood pressure or affect bleeding time. Use with care if taking immune meds\par
Conditions Benefited: Sleep issues, immune dysregulation, stress overload\par
\b\f0\lang9\par
Resveratrol (Antioxidant)\b0\par
Benefits: Polyphenol with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. Cardiovascular health. It may also help reduce blood pressure, prevent blood clotting, and lower cholesterol levels. Reduces oxidative stress. Anti-Aging. Neuroprotection. Mental health. Anti-cancer properties. Metabolic health - blood sugar regulation. Weight-management. Brain health and cognitive function\par
Sources: Red grapes, red wine, berries, peanuts, dark chocolate, japanese knotweed, cocoa\par
Considerations: Resveratrol may interact with certain medications, such as blood thinners (e.g., warfarin) and antiplatelet drugs. There is limited research on the safety of resveratrol during pregnancy and breastfeeding. High doses can lead to gastrointestinal issues like diarrhea or stomach upset\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression and anxiety. Cardiovascular Disease. Heart disease. High blood pressure. Cancer. Neurodegenerative diseases (alzheimer\f1\rquote\f0 s and parkinson\f1\rquote\f0 s disease). Diabetes and metabolic syndrome. Obesity. Inflammatory conditions. Arthritis and IBD. Liver disease\par
\par
\b Rhodiola Rosea (Adaptogen) (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Increases stamina, reduces fatigue, boosts energy, and enhances mental clarity and focus\par
Source: Root of the Rhodiola plant, capsules, powder, teas\par
Considerations: \lang1033 Best taken in the morning. May interact with stimulants\lang9\par
Conditions Benefited: Stress. Depression. Fatigue. Anxiety. Cognitive function\par
\par
\b\lang1033 Royal Jelly / Bee Pollen (Food, folk remedy) \b0\par
Benefits: Nutrient-dense bee products used for immunity, energy, and skin health\par
Sources: Capsules, softgels, fresh from apiaries\par
Considerations: Can cause allergic reactions in pollen-sensitive individuals\par
Conditions Benefited: Immune depletion, fatigue, skin issues, hormonal imbalance\lang9\par
\par
\b Rutin (Antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: Bioflavonoid with antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and vascular-protective effects; strengthens capillaries, reduces histamine release, and supports collagen stability and circulation\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Sources: Found in buckwheat, citrus peels, apples, and asparagus; available in powder or capsule form, often paired with quercetin or vitamin C\par
Considerations: Best taken with food and vitamin C to enhance absorption; generally well-tolerated. Works synergistically with other flavonoids for mast cell and vessel support\par
Conditions Benefited: MCAS, varicose veins, hemorrhoids, bruising, vascular fragility, inflammation, oxidative stress\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 S\f1\fs24\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb480\sl276\slmult1\f0\lang9 Saffron\b0\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Benefits: Supports mood, reduces anxiety and depression, has neuroprotective and antioxidant effects\par
Sources: Crocus sativus stigma extract, usually standardized in capsules\par
Considerations: Well tolerated. High doses can be sedating or overstimulating in sensitive individuals\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression, anxiety, PMS, cognitive decline\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\f1\lang1033\par
SAMe (S-Adenosyl methionine)\b0\par
Benefits: Supports mood, joint health, and methylation. Natural antidepressant and liver protectant\par
Sources: Body-produced; available in enteric-coated tablets\par
Considerations: Best taken on an empty stomach. Not for bipolar without supervision. May interact with antidepressants\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression, arthritis, liver support\par
\b\f0\lang9\par
Schisandra Berry (Schisandra chinensis) (Adaptogen) (Detox)\b0\par
Benefits: Enhances endurance, supports liver health, and improves cognitive function. Acts as a dual regulator: may provide stimulation (more energy, alertness), or promote \lang1033 c\lang9 almness (reduced anxiety, better sleep), effects vary from person to person\par
Sources: Berries of the Schisandra plant, capsules, powder, teas\par
Considerations: Inhibits liver enzymes (CYP3A4, CYP2E1, CYP1A2), which can slow the breakdown of medications.\lang1033  \lang9 Especially important if taking:\lang1033  \lang9 benzodiazepines\lang1033 , \lang9 statins\lang1033 , \lang9 SSRIs/SNRIs\lang1033 , b\lang9 lood thinners (e.g., warfarin)\lang1033 , i\lang9 mmunosuppressants or antiepileptics. Always consult a pharmacist or integrative doctor if on multiple medications. Start with a low dose to gauge individual response and take with food to limit discomfort. Can raise blood pressure in some cases. May cause GI upset initially, especially at high doses or on an empty stomach. Not recommended in pregnancy without supervision. Individuals with autoimmunce conditions, sever adrenal fatigue, or seizure disorders so use with caution\par
Conditions Benefited: Stress. Liver detoxification. Fatigue. Immune function\par
\lang1033\par
\b Sea Moss / Irish Moss (Food, mineral) \par
\b0 Benefits: Contains iodine, selenium, zinc, and more; supports thyroid, skin, and gut health\par
Sources: Gel or dried seaweed\par
Considerations: May contain heavy metals if sourced poorly\par
Conditions Benefited: Hypothyroidism, nutrient deficiency, skin issues, gut repair\par
\par
\b Selenium\b0\par
Benefits: Antioxidant. Anti-viral. Supports thyroid function. May reduce cognitive decline. Supports heart function. Immune system support\par
Sources: Brazil nuts, seafood, eggs\par
Considerations: Works with Vitamin E. When taken with Iodine supports thyroid function. Excess can be toxic\par
Conditions Benefited: Thyroid disorders. Cognitive health. Cardiovascular health. Fertility (important for sperm quality and reproductive health)\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb480\sl276\slmult1\b\lang9 Shilajit\b0\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Benefits: Rich in fulvic acid and trace minerals; supports mitochondrial energy production, testosterone, and endurance\par
Sources: Resin or powder from high-altitude rock exudates (Himalayas, Siberia); purified before use\par
Considerations: Use purified sources only. Avoid if heavy metal contamination risk. Can interact with iron metabolism\par
Conditions Benefited: Fatigue, testosterone deficiency, ME/CFS, chronic stress, metabolic dysfunction\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\lang1033 Silica (mineral)\b0\par
Benefits: Supports collagen synthesis, skin elasticity, joint health, and nail/hair strength\par
Sources: Bamboo extract, horsetail herb, mineral water\par
Considerations: Excess can burden kidneys; herbal forms like horsetail must be processed correctly\par
Conditions Benefited: Brittle nails, weak hair, sagging skin, joint stiffness\lang9\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\f1\lang1033 Skullcap\b0\par
Benefits: Calming herb with anti-inflammatory and sedative effects\par
Sources: Teas, tinctures, capsules\par
Considerations: Avoid with sedatives or alcohol. Some varieties may contain hepatotoxic compounds\par
Conditions Benefited: Insomnia, anxiety, nervous tension\f0\lang9\par
\par
\b Slippery Elm \b0\par
Benefits: Soothes and coats the digestive tract. Reduces irritation and inflammation in the gut lining. May relieve symptoms of IBS, gastritis, acid reflux, and sore throat. Promotes regular bowel movements by softening stool.\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Sources: Inner bark of the slippery elm tree. Available as powders, capsules, lozenges, or teas. Often found in gut-support blends or throat soothing formulas.\par
Considerations: Take away from medications and supplements (at least 1\f1\endash\f0 2 hours) as it may interfere with absorption due to its mucilage content.\lang1033  \lang9 Safe for short-term use; long-term safety not well studied.\lang1033  \lang9 Pregnant people should consult a healthcare provider before use.\par
Conditions Benefited:\lang1033  \lang9 IBS (both constipation- and diarrhea-predominant types).\lang1033  \lang9 Gastritis and acid reflux.\lang1033  \lang9 Ulcers or leaky gut.\lang1033  \lang9 Sore throat and upper GI irritation.\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\par
\b Spermidine (coenzyme, enzyme, antioxidant) \b0\par
Benefits: Promotes autophagy and cellular renewal. May support longevity and mitochondrial health\par
Sources: Aged cheese, wheat germ; supplement capsules\par
Considerations: Usually paired with polyamines (e.g., spermine) and NAD+ boosters\par
Conditions Benefited: Aging, cognitive decline, mitochondrial dysfunction, hair thinning\par
\par
\b Spirulina (Detox) \b0\par
Benefits: High in protein, vitamins, and minerals. Detoxifies heavy metals. Supports immune and gut health. Boosts energy\par
Sources: Blue-green algae. Powder, tablets\par
Considerations: Easily digested, providing bioavailable nutrients and antioxidants like phycocyanin. Taking with food improves tolerance. Can cause digestive upset in high doses. Avoid if allergic to algae or iodine\par
Conditions Benefited: Nutrient deficiencies. Heavy metal detox. Chronic fatigue. Immune system support\par
\par
\b Sodium (Electrolyte)\b0\par
Benefits: Hydration balance. Blood pressure regulation: Sodium can influence blood pressure, which is particularly important for people with hypertension or hypotension. Muscle function, helps prevent muscle cramps or spasms. Nerve function\par
Sources: Processed foods, salt, dairy, pickled foods, Condiments (soy sauce, ketchup), meats (especially cured or salted)\par
Considerations: Sodium supplementation should be done cautiously, as most people get enough sodium from their regular diet. In cases of low sodium (hyponatremia), electrolytes can be replaced with oral rehydration solutions or by consuming salty foods. Excessive sodium intake can lead to high blood pressure, edema (fluid retention), and increase the risk of cardiovascular events. Symptoms of overuse include swelling, headaches, dizziness, and in severe cases, kidney damage or heart failure exacerbation. Those with kidney dysfunction may struggle to balance sodium, as the kidneys' ability to excrete it is compromised. People with heart failure or other heart diseases should be cautious about sodium intake to avoid fluid buildup, which can worsen symptoms. Sodium can interact with certain medications, including diuretics and blood pressure medications. Put a sprinkle of salt in your water to aid hydration\par
Conditions Benefited: Dehydration. Fibromyalgia. MS. Electrolyte imbalance. Diabetes\par
\par
\b Sodium Bicarbonate (aka Baking Soda) (folk remedy, detox) \par
\b0 Benefits: Alkalizes pH, supports kidney function, relieves heartburn, and aids recovery in athletes\par
Sources: Baking soda (food-grade)\par
Considerations: May raise blood pressure. Use caution with kidney or heart issues\par
Conditions Benefited: Acid reflux, metabolic acidosis, lactic acid build-up, gout\b\lang9\par
\par
Sodium Butyrate\b0\par
Benefits: Strengthens gut barrier, nourishes colon cells, reduces intestinal inflammation, and supports short-chain fatty acid balance\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Sources: Produced naturally by gut bacteria fermenting fiber; supplemented as capsules (often odor-protected)\par
Considerations: May cause gas or bloating at first. Start low. Smell can be strong\par
Conditions Benefited: Leaky gut, IBS, IBD, histamine intolerance, brain fog\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\par
\b\lang9 St. John\f1\rquote\f0 s Wort\b0\par
Benefits: Natural antidepressant \lang1033 -\lang9  Helps with mild to moderate depression. Supports anxiety and stress relief. May aid in nerve pain and PMS symptoms\par
Sources: Found in herbal teas and extracts\par
Considerations: Avoid with SSRIs, birth control, or blood thinners (major interactions)\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression and Anxiety\lang1033 . \lang9 PMS\lang1033 . \lang9 Nerve Pain. Mood regulation\lang1033\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 T\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang9\par
\b\lang1033 Taurine\cf1\b0   \cf0\par
Benefits: Cardiovascular health. Regulates blood pressure and electrolyte balance. Reduces anxiety and protects cells from oxidative damage. Brain function. Enhances endurance and reduces muscle damage. Protects against retinal damage\par
Sources: Meat, seafood, dairy products, energy drinks (often synthetic taurine). Powder, capsules\par
Considerations: Well-absorbed, can be taken with or without food. Works synergistically with magnesium for relaxation and hydration support. Often included in pre-workout or recovery supplements. Can enhance the calming effects of magnesium and glycine. Supplements are typically not vegan/vegetarian, but some are available\par
Conditions Benefited: Heart disease. Anxiety. Electrolyte imbalances. Oxidative stress. Fatigue\par
\lang9\par
\b Theanine (L-Theanine) (Amino Acid) (Nootropic) \b0\par
Benefits: Promotes relaxation, reduces stress and anxiety. Improves sleep. Cognitive enhancement: Improves focus, memory, and mental clarity, especially when combined with caffeine. Mildly lowers blood pressure\par
Sources: Green and black tea, some mushrooms. Powder, capsules\par
Considerations: May enhance the calming effects of sedatives or anti-anxiety medications. Can counteract some of the jitteriness caused by caffeine, potentially improving focus when taken alongside caffeine. W\lang1033 orks well with melatonin\lang9\par
\lang1033 Conditions Benefited: Anxiety. Focus and cognitive function. Insomnia and sleep support. High blood pressure\par
\par
\b Threonine (EAA) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports joint, gut and skin health - Involved in collagen and elastin production. Immune function. Mood regulation - precursor to dopamine\par
Sources: Meat, fish, poultry, eggs, dairy. Vegan Sources: quinoa, chia seeds, spinach, pumpkin seeds, lentils\par
Considerations: Best absorbed with magnesium and Vitamin B6\par
Conditions Benefited: Joint and skin health. Digestive Issues (IBS, IBD, leaky gut).  Immune System Support - Strengthens antibody production. Depression and anxiety\par
\par
\b\lang9 Tryptophan (EAA) \b0\par
Benefits: Sleep, mood and appetite regulation. Crucial for the production of seratonin and melatonin\par
Sources: Turkey, chicken, eggs, dairy, nuts and seeds, soy products\par
Considerations: Taking tryptophan with antidepressants (e.g., SSRIs or MAOIs) can increase serotonin levels too much, leading to serotonin syndrome, which is dangerous. Alcohol and certain medications can reduce its effectiveness, as they impact serotonin production\par
Conditions Benefited: Depression and anxiety. Insomnia and sleep disorders. PMS and mood regulation. Chronic pain and Fibromyalgia. Appetite control and weight management. Chronic fatigue\par
\lang1033\par
\b TUDCA (Tauroursodeoxycholic Acid) (Coenzyme/enzyme, detox) \b0\par
Benefits: Supports liver and bile duct function. May protect mitochondria and reduce neuroinflammation\par
Sources: Synthetic form in capsules\par
Considerations: Often used in liver conditions; can cause GI upset in sensitive individuals\par
Conditions Benefited: Cholestasis, liver detox, mitochondrial health, gallbladder support\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 U\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Ubiquinol\b0\par
Benefits: Supports mitochondrial energy production. Improves heart health. Reduces oxidative stress\par
Sources: Fatty fish, organ meats, spinach, broccoli\par
Considerations: Can interact with statin medications (may be depleted by them). Take with a fat-containing meal. Ubiquinol is more bioavailable than Coq10, especially for older individuals\par
Conditions Benefited: Heart disease. Migraines. Chronic fatigue. Neurodegenerative diseases. Fibromyalgia\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 V\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Valerian Root\par
\b0 Benefits: Promotes relaxation, calmness and sleep. May help with anxiety and nervous tension\par
Sources: Capsules, tinctures, tea\par
Considerations: Can cause drowsiness\f1\emdash\f0 avoid driving after use. May interact with sedatives or alcohol\par
Conditions Benefited: Insomnia and sleep disturbances. Anxiety and nervous tension, muscle relaxation. Stress-related conditions\par
\par
\b Vitex (Chaste Tree Berry)\b0\par
Benefits: Regulates hormonal cycles, supports progesterone balance, and reduces PMS or menopausal symptoms. May improve luteal phase defects.\par
Sources: Dried berries, tinctures, capsules.\par
Considerations: Slow-acting\f1\emdash may take 2\endash 3 months to see effects. Avoid if using hormonal contraceptives or during pregnancy unless directed. Can worsen mood in some sensitive individuals.\par
Conditions Benefited: PMS, PMDD, irregular cycles, fertility support, menopausal symptoms, luteal phase insufficiency.\cf1\f0\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf0\b\fs40 W\cf1\b0\fs24\par
\cf0\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b\lang9 Wheatgrass\b0\fs22\par
Benefits: Rich in chlorophyll and antioxidants. Claimed to boost detoxification and energy.\par
Sources: Juice bars, powders, fresh trays\par
Considerations: Limited evidence. May cause nausea or allergic reaction.\par
Conditions Benefited: Anecdotally used for fatigue, digestion, and skin issues.\par
\cf1\b\fs24\lang1033\par
\cf0 White Oak (Quercus alba) \par
\b0 Benefits: Anti-inflammatory. Astringent properties. Reduces fluid loss (helpful for diarrhea). Wound healing. Anti-microbial and anti-fungal - great for oral and skin infections. Oral health and digestive support\par
Sources: Teas, tinctures, topical, capsules, gargles\par
Considerations: Can be harsh on the stomach - the high tannin content may cause irritation in those with sensitive digestion (e.g., gastritis, ulcers). Prolonged use may interfere with nutrient absorption due to tannins binding to minerals. Can affect iron absorption and interact with blood thinners. Not recommended for severe kidney disease. Use caution with autoimmunity - While anti-inflammatory, it may also stimulate immune responses\par
Conditions Benefited: Diarrhea and digestive issues. Skin conditions (inflammation, chilblains). Hemorrhoids and varicose veins. Oral health. Arthritis and joint pain. Infections (fungal, bacterial, and some viral infections)\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 X\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Xanthan Gum\b0\par
Benefits: May support gut health in small amounts. Blood sugar regulation\par
Sources: Powder\par
Considerations: Not fully digested\f1\emdash\f0 acts as a soluble fiber. Can cause bloating or gas in sensitive individuals in high quantities. Best used in small amounts. Helps stabilize insulin response when added to carbohydrate-rich meals\par
Conditions Benefited: Dysphagia. Gut issues like gastroparesis, IBS-D. Type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 Y\par
\b0\fs24\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b Yarrow\b0\par
Benefits: Wound healing and skin conditions. Anti-inflammatory. Aids digestion. Menstrual cramps and heavy periods. Circulatory issues (varicose veins, poor circulation). may help ease anxiety\par
Sources: Teas, tinctures, capsules\par
Considerations: Can cause allergic reactions in sensitive individuals\par
Conditions Benefited: Digestive issues (bloating, IBS). Skin health. Immune function\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\fs40 Z\b0\fs24\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb480\sl276\slmult1\b\lang9 Zeolite\b0\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb200\sl276\slmult1 Benefits: Natural binder that traps heavy metals, mold toxins, and environmental pollutants; supports detox without overburdening the liver\par
Sources: Volcanic mineral; often micronized or activated in powder or capsule form\par
Considerations: Must be high-quality and tested for contaminants. Drink plenty of water. Avoid if severely constipated\par
Conditions Benefited: Mold illness, MCS, Lyme, detox support, chemical sensitivity\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\par
\b Zinc\b0\par
Benefits: Supports immune function, skin health, and protein synthesis. Essential for DNA synthesis and cell division. Aids in Vitamin A metabolism\par
Sources: Meat, shellfish, legumes, seeds, nuts\par
Considerations: Avoid taking high doses with calcium or iron as they may interfere with absorption. High doses may cause nausea\par
Conditions Benefited: Immune function. Skin and hair health. Wound healing\par
\par
\b Zinc Carnosine\b0\par
Benefits: Supports gut lining integrity and mucosal repair. Antioxidant. Enhances wound healing in gastrointestinal tissue.\par
Sources: Complex of zinc and the dipeptide carnosine; capsules or powders.\par
Considerations: Distinct from regular zinc supplements. Typically dosed ~75 mg/day of zinc carnosine (not elemental zinc). Well studied in gastric ulcers.\par
Conditions Benefited: Leaky gut, GERD, gastric ulcers, NSAID-induced mucosal damage, IBS/IBD.\par
\par
\b\f1 ZMA (Zinc Monomethionine Aspartate)\b0\par
Benefits: Combines zinc, magnesium, and B6 to support sleep, testosterone, and recovery\par
Sources: Preformulated supplement, often marketed to athletes\par
Considerations: Best taken before bed on an empty stomach. May cause vivid dreams\par
Conditions Benefited: Insomnia, muscle recovery, testosterone support\f0\par
\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\i - Now sing the full list to the tune of We Didn't Start the Fire - \par
\i0\par
\b\fs40 Supplement Mixers \par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\fs24 Here\f1\rquote\f0 s a list of functional liquid bases ideal for supplement drinks \f1\emdash  \f0 chosen for compatibility with powders, health benefits, and mixability within ~500 ml drinks:\par
\b Hydration & Electrolyte Support\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Coconut water \f1\endash  \f0 natural electrolytes; good for energy, recovery\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Electrolyte-infused water \f1\endash  \f0 plain or flavored; ideal for muscle support\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Aloe vera juice (diluted) \f1\endash  \f0 hydration, digestive support\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b Mild Plant-Based Milks\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Almond milk \f1\endash  \f0 mild, low-fat, blends well with protein\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Oat milk \f1\endash  \f0 slightly sweet, good for brain blends\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Rice milk \f1\endash  \f0 hypoallergenic, neutral flavor\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Macadamia milk \f1\endash  \f0 slightly creamy, contains healthy fats\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b Antioxidant-Rich Juices\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Tart cherry juice \f1\endash  \f0 sleep, inflammation, muscle soreness\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Pomegranate juice \f1\endash  \f0 rich in polyphenols, anti-inflammatory\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Blueberry juice \f1\endash  \f0 brain health, antioxidants\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Beet juice \f1\endash  \f0 mitochondrial support, nitric oxide booster\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b Stimulant-Optional Bases\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Matcha green tea \f1\endash  \f0 caffeine + L-theanine\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Yerba mate (cooled) \f1\endash  \f0 energy, thermogenesis\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Roasted dandelion root tea \f1\endash  \f0 liver support, coffee alternative\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Chicory root tea \f1\endash  \f0 prebiotics, earthy flavor\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b Digestive/Absorption Enhancers\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Lemon water (warm or cold) \f1\endash  \f0 flavor, aids vitamin C absorption\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Apple cider vinegar + water (diluted) \f1\endash  \f0 digestive kick, mild antimicrobial (use <15 ml per drink)\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Ginger tea (cooled) \f1\endash  \f0 anti-inflammatory, digestion-enhancing\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b Neutral Mixers\b0\par

\pard{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}{\*\pn\pnlvlblt\pnf10\pnindent0{\pntxtb\'B7}}\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Filtered water \f1\endash  \f0 always reliable\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Sparkling water \f1\endash  \f0 for effervescent blends (only if all powders dissolve well)\par
{\pntext\f10\'B7\tab}Herbal teas (e.g., chamomile, rooibos, peppermint) \f1\endash  \f0 calming or soothing function depending on herbs\par

\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par

\pard\keep\keepn\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf3\b\f3\fs28\lang9 Vitamindex Dot Key\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\cf0\b0\f4\fs22\u9679?\f5  \f6 Symbol\f3\cell\f6 Visual Tag\f3\cell\f6 Category\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f7\u-10179?\u-8905?\f3\cell\f6 Teal Diamond\f3\cell\f6 Amino Acid\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f7\u-10179?\u-8906?\f3\cell\f6 Orange Diamond\f3\cell\f6 Antioxidant\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f8\u-10179?\u-8214?\f3\cell\f6 Purple Square\f3\cell\f6 Food Remedy\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f8\u-10179?\u-8213?\f3\cell\f6 Brown Square\f3\cell\f6 Essential Oil \f5\endash  \f6 Topical Only\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f9\u9724?\u-497?\f3\cell\f6 Charcoal Square\f3\cell\f6 Detox Support\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f9\u10035?\u-497?\f3\cell\f6 Starburst\f3\cell\f6 Folk Remedy\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f4\u11039?\f3\cell\f6 Hexagon\f3\cell\f6 Nootropic\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f8\u-10179?\u-8219?\f3\cell\f6 Dark Red Square\f3\cell\f6 Mineral\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f8\u-10179?\u-8217?\f3\cell\f6 Light Orange Square\f3\cell\f6 Vitamin\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f8\u-10179?\u-8215?\f3\cell\f6 Light Green Square\f3\cell\f6 Adaptogen\f3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trrh1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx2880\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx5760\clcfpat4\clcbpat5\clbrdrl\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrt\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrr\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4\clbrdrb\brdrw8\brdrs\brdrcf4 \cellx8640 
\pard\intbl\sl240\slmult1\f7\u-10179?\u-8902?\f3\cell\f6 Red Triangle\f3\cell\f6 Coenzyme / Enzyme\f3\cell\row 
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f0\fs24\par
| Supplement                        | Tags                                      |\par
| --------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------- |\par
| Acetyl L-Carnitine (ALCAR)        | Amino Acid, Nootropic                     |\par
| Activated Charcoal                | Detox Support, Folk Remedy                |\par
| Alpha-Lipoic Acid (ALA)           | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Apple Cider Vinegar               | Food Remedy, Folk Remedy                  |\par
| Ashwagandha                       | Adaptogen                                 |\par
| Astaxanthin                       | Antioxidant                               |\par
| BCAAs                             | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Berberine                         | Mineral, Detox Support                    |\par
| Bilberry                          | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Boswellia Serrata Extract         | Adaptogen, Detox Support                  |\par
| Bromelain                         | Coenzyme / Enzyme, Detox Support          |\par
| Caffeine                          | Nootropic                                 |\par
| Cacao                             | Food Remedy, Antioxidant, Folk Remedy     |\par
| Calcium                           | Mineral, Electrolyte                      |\par
| CBD (Cannabidiol)                 | Essential Oil \f1\endash  Topical Only, Folk Remedy |\par
| Celery Juice                      | Food Remedy, Folk Remedy                  |\par
| Chaga                             | Antioxidant, Folk Remedy                  |\par
| Chromium                          | Mineral                                   |\par
| Cissus Quadrangularis             | Adaptogen, Detox Support                  |\par
| Citicoline (CDP-Choline)          | Nootropic                                 |\par
| Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10)              | Coenzyme / Enzyme, Antioxidant            |\par
| Collagen                          | Amino Acid, Food Remedy                   |\par
| Creatine                          | Amino Acid, Nootropic                     |\par
| Curcumin (Turmeric)               | Antioxidant, Detox Support                |\par
| D-Ribose                          | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| DAO (Diamine Oxidase)             | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| Echinacea                         | Adaptogen, Antioxidant                    |\par
| Fiber                             | Food Remedy                               |\par
| GABA                              | Amino Acid, Nootropic                     |\par
| Ginger                            | Food Remedy, Folk Remedy                  |\par
| Ginkgo Biloba                     | Antioxidant, Nootropic                    |\par
| Ginseng                           | Adaptogen, Nootropic                      |\par
| Glutamine                         | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Glutathione                       | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Glycine                           | Amino Acid, Detox Support                 |\par
| Green Tea Extract                 | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Hesperidin                        | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Histidine                         | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Holy Basil                        | Adaptogen                                 |\par
| Hyaluronic Acid                   | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| Jasmine                           | Essential Oil \endash  Topical Only, Food Remedy |\par
| Kombucha                          | Food Remedy, Folk Remedy                  |\par
| L-Arginine                        | Amino Acid                                |\par
| L-Citrulline                      | Amino Acid                                |\par
| L-Ornithine                       | Amino Acid                                |\par
| L-Tyrosine                        | Amino Acid, Nootropic                     |\par
| Lemon Balm                        | Food Remedy, Essential Oil \endash  Topical Only |\par
| Lion\rquote s Mane                       | Adaptogen, Nootropic                      |\par
| Luteolin                          | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Lysine                            | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Maca Root                         | Adaptogen                                 |\par
| Magnesium                         | Mineral                                   |\par
| Manganese                         | Mineral, Antioxidant                      |\par
| Marjoram                          | Essential Oil \endash  Topical Only, Food Remedy |\par
| Melatonin                         | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Metformin                         | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| Methionine                        | Amino Acid                                |\par
| MSM (Methylsulfonylmethane)       | Detox Support                             |\par
| Milk Thistle                      | Detox Support, Folk Remedy                |\par
| NAC (N-Acetyl Cysteine)           | Antioxidant, Detox Support                |\par
| Nicotinamide Riboside (NR)        | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| NMN (Nicotinamide Mononucleotide) | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| Omega-3 Fatty Acids               | Nootropic                                 |\par
| Oregano                           | Essential Oil \endash  Topical Only, Folk Remedy |\par
| Palmitoylethanolamide (PEA)       | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| Phenylalanine                     | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Phosphatidylserine                | Nootropic                                 |\par
| Piperine                          | Coenzyme / Enzyme                         |\par
| Potassium                         | Electrolyte                               |\par
| Prebiotics                        | Food Remedy                               |\par
| Probiotics                        | Food Remedy                               |\par
| Protein                           | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Pterostilbene                     | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Quercetin                         | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Resveratrol                       | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Rhodiola Rosea                    | Adaptogen, Nootropic                      |\par
| Rutin                             | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Saffron                           | Antioxidant                               |\par
| Schisandra Berry                  | Adaptogen, Detox Support                  |\par
| Selenium                          | Mineral, Antioxidant                      |\par
| Shilajit                          | Detox Support                             |\par
| Slippery Elm                      | Food Remedy, Folk Remedy                  |\par
| Spirulina                         | Detox Support                             |\par
| Sodium                            | Electrolyte                               |\par
| Sodium Butyrate                   | Food Remedy                               |\par
| St. John\rquote s Wort                   | Folk Remedy                               |\par
| Taurine                           | Amino Acid, Electrolyte                   |\par
| Theanine (L-Theanine)             | Amino Acid, Nootropic                     |\par
| Threonine                         | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Tryptophan                        | Amino Acid                                |\par
| Ubiquinol                         | Coenzyme / Enzyme, Antioxidant            |\par
| Valerian Root                     | Folk Remedy                               |\par
| Wheatgrass                        | Food Remedy, Folk Remedy                  |\par
| White Oak                         | Folk Remedy                               |\par
| Xanthan Gum                       | Food Remedy                               |\par
| Xylitol                           | Food Remedy                               |\par
| Yarrow                            | Folk Remedy                               |\par
| Zeolite                           | Detox Support, Folk Remedy                |\par
| Zinc                              | Mineral                                   |\par
\par
Beta-Alanine\par
Tags: Amino Acid\par
Choline\par
Tags: Nootropic, Coenzyme / Enzyme\par
Cordyceps\par
Tags: Adaptogen, Nootropic\par
Dandelion Root\par
Tags: Detox Support, Folk Remedy\par
Elderberry\par
Tags: Antioxidant, Folk Remedy\par
Fenugreek\par
Tags: Food Remedy, Folk Remedy\par
Glucomannan\par
Tags: Food Remedy\par
Hawthorn Berry\par
Tags: Antioxidant, Folk Remedy\par
Inositol\par
Tags: Nootropic\par
Kava Kava\par
Tags: Folk Remedy\par
L-Carnitine\par
Tags: Amino Acid\par
Moringa\par
Tags: Food Remedy, Antioxidant\par
Nettle Leaf\par
Tags: Detox Support, Folk Remedy\par
PQQ (Pyrroloquinoline Quinone)\par
Tags: Coenzyme / Enzyme, Antioxidant\par
Reishi Mushroom\par
Tags: Adaptogen, Folk Remedy\par
SAMe (S-Adenosyl methionine)\par
Tags: Coenzyme / Enzyme, Nootropic\par
Skullcap\par
Tags: Folk Remedy\par
Tribulus Terrestris\par
Tags: Folk Remedy\par
ZMA (Zinc Monomethionine Aspartate)\par
Tags: Mineral, Amino Acid\par
\f0\par
}
 